docs/community/team.md, before:

# About the project and team

napari is a consensus-based community project. Anyone with an interest in the project can join the community, contribute to the project design, and participate in the decision making process. You can learn more about how the project is run by reading our [governance model](napari-governance). This page lists our current and emeritus [core developers](governance.md#core-developers). Core developers are community members that have demonstrated a sustained commitment to the project through ongoing contributions and that they can maintain napari with care.

## Current Core Developers

- [Ashley Anderson](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=aganders3) - [@aganders3](https://github.com/aganders3)
- [Draga Doncila Pop](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=DragaDoncila) - [@DragaDoncila](https://github.com/DragaDoncila)
- [Genevieve Buckley](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=GenevieveBuckley) - [@GenevieveBuckley](https://github.com/GenevieveBuckley)
- [Grzegorz Bokota](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=Czaki) - [@Czaki](https://github.com/Czaki)
- [Juan Nunez-Iglesias](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=jni) - [@jni](https://github.com/jni)
- [Kevin Yamauchi](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=kevinyamauchi) - [@kevinyamauchi](https://github.com/kevinyamauchi)
- [Kira Evans](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=kne42) - [@kne42](https://github.com/kne42)
- [Kyle Harrington](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=kephale) - [@kephale](https://github.com/kephale)
- [Lorenzo Gaifas](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=brisvag) - [@brisvag](https://github.com/brisvag)
- [Melissa Weber Mendonça](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=melissawm) - [@melissawm](https://github.com/melissawm)
- [Peter Sobolewski](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=psobolewskiPhD) - [@psobolewskiPhD](https://github.com/psobolewskiPhD)
- [Tim Monko](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author:timmonko) - [@TimMonko](https://github.com/TimMonko)
- [Wouter-Michiel Vierdag](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=melonora) - [@melonora](https://github.com/melonora)
- [Carol Willing](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=willingc) - [@willingc](https://github.com/willingc)


## Emeritus Core Developers

- [Ahmet Can Solak](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=AhmetCanSolak) - [@AhmetCanSolak](https://github.com/AhmetCanSolak)
- [Alister Burt](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=alisterburt) - [@alisterburt](https://github.com/alisterburt)
- [Andy Sweet](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=andy-sweet) - [@andy-sweet](https://github.com/andy-sweet)
- [Justine Larsen](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=justinelarsen) - [@justinelarsen](https://github.com/justinelarsen)
- [Loic Royer](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=royerloic) - [@royerloic](https://github.com/royerloic)
- [Lucy Liu](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=lucyleeow) - [@lucyleeow](https://github.com/lucyleeow)
- [Nicholas Sofroniew](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=sofroniewn) - [@sofroniewn](https://github.com/sofroniewn)
- [Shannon Axelrod](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=shanaxel42) - [@shanaxel42](https://github.com/shanaxel42)
- [Talley Lambert](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=tlambert03) - [@tlambert03](https://github.com/tlambert03)
- [Ziyang Liu](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=potating-potato) - [@potating-potato](https://github.com/potating-potato)

## Current Steering Council Members

- [Draga Doncila Pop](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=DragaDoncila) - [@DragaDoncila](https://github.com/DragaDoncila)
- [Juan Nunez-Iglesias](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=jni) - [@jni](https://github.com/jni)
- [Kevin Yamauchi](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=kevinyamauchi) - [@kevinyamauchi](https://github.com/kevinyamauchi)
- [Kyle Harrington](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=kephale) - [@kephale](https://github.com/kephale)

## Emeritus Steering Council Members

- [Loic Royer](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=royerloic) - [@royerloic](https://github.com/royerloic)
- [Nicholas Sofroniew](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=sofroniewn) - [@sofroniewn](https://github.com/sofroniewn)
- [Talley Lambert](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=tlambert03) - [@tlambert03](https://github.com/tlambert03)

## Project history

The napari project began in the spring of 2018. It was born out of the shared need for fast n-dimensional image viewing in Python by project co-founders Loïc Royer, from the Chan Zuckerberg Biohub (CZ Biohub), and Juan Nunez-Iglesias, from Monash University. Since then it has grown rapidly to now also provide a graphical user interface to a plugin ecosystem of image analysis tools for scientists to use in their daily work.

Named after the tiny village of Napari, in the Republic of Kiribati in the Pacifc Ocean, at the geographic midpoint between Loïc's home of San Francisco and Juan’s home of Melbourne, the napari project has, from its inception, been a global community effort.

Early development on the project was led by Kira Evans, first as an intern with Loïc at CZ Biohub, then later as a software engineer at the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI). Nicholas Sofroniew (CZI) joined in the fall of 2018, accelerating both the organization and management of the growing team, as well as the development of core features.

You can read a full history of the project’s founding and early development in this [blog post](https://ilovesymposia.com/2019/10/24/introducing-napari-a-fast-n-dimensional-image-viewer-in-python/) from Juan.

Over time, napari has grown to over 80 direct contributors. Talley Lambert, from Harvard Medical School, began contributing around the time of Juan's blog post, and has been a critical driver of napari's development ever since. We have core developers located in three continents and three biweekly community calls spread across the day to try to accommodate users and contributors in any time zone.

Read more about napari’s [mission and values](https://napari.org/stable/community/mission_and_values.html), how to get started as a [contributor](https://napari.org/stable/developers/contributing.html) or join us in our [zulip chat](https://napari.zulipchat.com/login/) for a more synchronous conversation. You can also follow us on [mastodon](https://fosstodon.org/@napari).

## Institutional and funding Partners

- [Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Foundation.](https://chanzuckerberg.com/science) Representative [Kyle I. S. Harrington](https://github.com/kephale).

    - The napari project and community have been generously supported by the [CZI Science Imaging Program.](https://chanzuckerberg.com/science/programs-resources/imaging/)
    - Since late 2018, Juan Nunez-Iglesias has been supported by a CZI Imaging Software Fellowship.
    - The CZI Imaging Tech Team, under the leadership of Nicholas Sofroniew and engineering management of Justine Larsen, has been making direct engineering and design contributions to improve and expand napari.
    - The CZI Imaging Tech Team has supported [Quansight Labs](https://labs.quansight.org) and independent contractors to improve and expand napari.
    - The CZI Imaging Tech Team, through an effort led by Justin Kiggins, has created [napari-hub.org](https://www.napari-hub.org/), a site to make discovering and sharing napari plugins easier.
    - CZI has launched a [grant program](https://chanzuckerberg.com/rfa/napari-plugin-grants/) to help accelerate the napari plugin developer community.

The current representative of the Institutional and Funding Partner Advisory Council on the napari steering council is Kyle I. S. Harrington.

If you or your organization are interested in also supporting the napari project and becoming an Institutional and Funding Partner, please email the napari steering council at `napari-steering-council@googlegroups.com`.

Commit message:

Add contracted roles to team page and update core developer to core team member

docs/community/team.md, after:

# About the project and team

napari is a consensus-based community project. Anyone with an interest in the project can join the community, contribute to the project design, and participate in the decision making process. You can learn more about how the project is run by reading our [governance model](napari-governance). This page lists our current and emeritus [core team members](governance.md#core-developers). Core team members are community members that have demonstrated a sustained commitment to the project through ongoing contributions and that they can maintain napari with care. We also list our current and emeritus steering council members. Finally, the project currently has a number of paid team members in various roles supported by grants. They are listed below under the [Contracted Roles](#contracted-roles) section 

## Current Core Team Members

- [Ashley Anderson](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=aganders3) - [@aganders3](https://github.com/aganders3)
- [Draga Doncila Pop](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=DragaDoncila) - [@DragaDoncila](https://github.com/DragaDoncila)
- [Genevieve Buckley](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=GenevieveBuckley) - [@GenevieveBuckley](https://github.com/GenevieveBuckley)
- [Grzegorz Bokota](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=Czaki) - [@Czaki](https://github.com/Czaki)
- [Juan Nunez-Iglesias](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=jni) - [@jni](https://github.com/jni)
- [Kevin Yamauchi](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=kevinyamauchi) - [@kevinyamauchi](https://github.com/kevinyamauchi)
- [Kira Evans](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=kne42) - [@kne42](https://github.com/kne42)
- [Kyle Harrington](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=kephale) - [@kephale](https://github.com/kephale)
- [Lorenzo Gaifas](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=brisvag) - [@brisvag](https://github.com/brisvag)
- [Melissa Weber Mendonça](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=melissawm) - [@melissawm](https://github.com/melissawm)
- [Peter Sobolewski](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=psobolewskiPhD) - [@psobolewskiPhD](https://github.com/psobolewskiPhD)
- [Tim Monko](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author:timmonko) - [@TimMonko](https://github.com/TimMonko)
- [Wouter-Michiel Vierdag](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=melonora) - [@melonora](https://github.com/melonora)
- [Carol Willing](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=willingc) - [@willingc](https://github.com/willingc)


## Emeritus Core Team Members

- [Ahmet Can Solak](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=AhmetCanSolak) - [@AhmetCanSolak](https://github.com/AhmetCanSolak)
- [Alister Burt](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=alisterburt) - [@alisterburt](https://github.com/alisterburt)
- [Andy Sweet](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=andy-sweet) - [@andy-sweet](https://github.com/andy-sweet)
- [Justine Larsen](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=justinelarsen) - [@justinelarsen](https://github.com/justinelarsen)
- [Loic Royer](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=royerloic) - [@royerloic](https://github.com/royerloic)
- [Lucy Liu](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=lucyleeow) - [@lucyleeow](https://github.com/lucyleeow)
- [Nicholas Sofroniew](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=sofroniewn) - [@sofroniewn](https://github.com/sofroniewn)
- [Shannon Axelrod](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=shanaxel42) - [@shanaxel42](https://github.com/shanaxel42)
- [Talley Lambert](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=tlambert03) - [@tlambert03](https://github.com/tlambert03)
- [Ziyang Liu](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=potating-potato) - [@potating-potato](https://github.com/potating-potato)

## Current Steering Council Members

- [Draga Doncila Pop](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=DragaDoncila) - [@DragaDoncila](https://github.com/DragaDoncila)
- [Juan Nunez-Iglesias](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=jni) - [@jni](https://github.com/jni)
- [Kevin Yamauchi](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=kevinyamauchi) - [@kevinyamauchi](https://github.com/kevinyamauchi)
- [Kyle Harrington](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=kephale) - [@kephale](https://github.com/kephale)

## Emeritus Steering Council Members

- [Loic Royer](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=royerloic) - [@royerloic](https://github.com/royerloic)
- [Nicholas Sofroniew](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=sofroniewn) - [@sofroniewn](https://github.com/sofroniewn)
- [Talley Lambert](https://github.com/napari/napari/commits?author=tlambert03) - [@tlambert03](https://github.com/tlambert03)

# Contracted Roles

- Developers-in-Residence: Grezgorz Bokota, Lorenzo Gaifas, Draga Doncila Pop
- Community Managers: Tim Monko, Lorenzo Gaifas
- Operations Manager: Draga Doncila Pop

## Project history

The napari project began in the spring of 2018. It was born out of the shared need for fast n-dimensional image viewing in Python by project co-founders Loïc Royer, from the Chan Zuckerberg Biohub (CZ Biohub), and Juan Nunez-Iglesias, from Monash University. Since then it has grown rapidly to now also provide a graphical user interface to a plugin ecosystem of image analysis tools for scientists to use in their daily work.

Named after the tiny village of Napari, in the Republic of Kiribati in the Pacifc Ocean, at the geographic midpoint between Loïc's home of San Francisco and Juan’s home of Melbourne, the napari project has, from its inception, been a global community effort.

Early development on the project was led by Kira Evans, first as an intern with Loïc at CZ Biohub, then later as a software engineer at the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI). Nicholas Sofroniew (CZI) joined in the fall of 2018, accelerating both the organization and management of the growing team, as well as the development of core features.

You can read a full history of the project’s founding and early development in this [blog post](https://ilovesymposia.com/2019/10/24/introducing-napari-a-fast-n-dimensional-image-viewer-in-python/) from Juan.

Over time, napari has grown to over 80 direct contributors. Talley Lambert, from Harvard Medical School, began contributing around the time of Juan's blog post, and has been a critical driver of napari's development ever since. We have core team members located in three continents and three biweekly community calls spread across the day to try to accommodate users and contributors in any time zone.

Read more about napari’s [mission and values](https://napari.org/stable/community/mission_and_values.html), how to get started as a [contributor](https://napari.org/stable/developers/contributing.html) or join us in our [zulip chat](https://napari.zulipchat.com/login/) for a more synchronous conversation. You can also follow us on [mastodon](https://fosstodon.org/@napari).

## Institutional and funding Partners

- [Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Foundation.](https://chanzuckerberg.com/science) Representative [Kyle I. S. Harrington](https://github.com/kephale).

    - The napari project and community have been generously supported by the [CZI Science Imaging Program.](https://chanzuckerberg.com/science/programs-resources/imaging/)
    - Since late 2018, Juan Nunez-Iglesias has been supported by a CZI Imaging Software Fellowship.
    - The CZI Imaging Tech Team, under the leadership of Nicholas Sofroniew and engineering management of Justine Larsen, has been making direct engineering and design contributions to improve and expand napari.
    - The CZI Imaging Tech Team has supported [Quansight Labs](https://labs.quansight.org) and independent contractors to improve and expand napari.
    - The CZI Imaging Tech Team, through an effort led by Justin Kiggins, has created [napari-hub.org](https://www.napari-hub.org/), a site to make discovering and sharing napari plugins easier.
    - CZI has launched a [grant program](https://chanzuckerberg.com/rfa/napari-plugin-grants/) to help accelerate the napari plugin developer community.

The current representative of the Institutional and Funding Partner Advisory Council on the napari steering council is Kyle I. S. Harrington.

If you or your organization are interested in also supporting the napari project and becoming an Institutional and Funding Partner, please email the napari steering council at `napari-steering-council@googlegroups.com`.
