.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, before:

# Description
<!-- What does this pull request (PR) do? Why is it necessary? -->
<!-- Tell us about your new feature, improvement, or fix! -->
<!-- If your change includes user interface changes, please add an image, or an animation "An image is worth a thousand words!" -->
<!-- You can use https://www.cockos.com/licecap/ or similar to create animations -->

## Type of change
<!-- Please delete options that are not relevant. -->
- [ ] Bug-fix (non-breaking change which fixes an issue)
- [ ] New feature (non-breaking change which adds functionality)
- [ ] Breaking change (fix or feature that would cause existing functionality to not work as expected)
- [ ] This change requires a documentation update

# References
<!-- What resources, documentation, and guides were used in the creation of this PR? -->
<!-- If this is a bug-fix or otherwise resolves an issue, reference it here with "closes #(issue)" -->

# How has this been tested?
<!-- Please describe the tests that you ran to verify your changes. -->
- [ ] example: the test suite for my feature covers cases x, y, and z
- [ ] example: all tests pass with my change

## Final checklist:
- [ ] My PR is the minimum possible work for the desired functionality
- [ ] I have commented my code, particularly in hard-to-understand areas
- [ ] I have made corresponding changes to the documentation
- [ ] I have added tests that prove my fix is effective or that my feature works
- [ ] If I included new strings, I have used `trans.` to make them localizable.
      For more information see our [translations guide](https://napari.org/docs/dev/guides/translations.html).

Commit message:

Updated issue and PR templates for this repo

.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, after:

# Description
<!-- What does this pull request (PR) do? Why is it necessary? -->
<!-- Tell us about your new content, improvement, or fix! -->
<!-- If your can, please add an image, or an animation "An image is worth a thousand words!" -->
<!-- You can use https://www.cockos.com/licecap/ or similar to create animations -->

## Type of change
<!-- Please delete options that are not relevant. -->
- [ ] Fixes or improves existing content
- [ ] Adds new content page(s)
- [ ] Fixes or improves workflow, documentation build or deployment

# References
<!-- What resources, documentation, and guides were used in the creation of this PR? -->
<!-- If this is a fix or otherwise resolves an issue, reference it here with "closes #(issue)" -->

## Final checklist:
- [ ] My PR is the minimum possible work for the desired functionality
- [ ] I have commented my code, particularly in hard-to-understand areas
- [ ] I have added [alt text](https://webaim.org/techniques/alttext/) to new images included in this PR
