README.md, before:

# napari docs

This repository contains the sources for the napari documentation. This includes tutorials, how-tos and other narrative documentation. The autogenerated API documentation is extracted from the source code docstrings, which live on https://github.com/napari/napari

## mission, values, and roadmap

For more information about our plans for `napari` you can read our [mission and values statement](https://napari.org/community/mission_and_values.html), which includes more details on our vision for supporting a plugin ecosystem around napari.
You can see details of [the project roadmap here](https://napari.org/roadmaps/index.html).

## contributing

Contributions are encouraged! If you're new or unsure about anything check out our [issues tracker](https://github.com/napari/docs/issues) or reach out on [zulip](https://napari.zulipchat.com/) before jumping in.
It's nice to be able preview how your contribution will look on the web, so here we provide a brief summary of what's required for a local setup that will allow you to do so.
Alternatively, our CI setup provides a preview link that shows your changes.
Please read our [contributing guide](https://napari.org/dev/developers/contributing/documentation/index.html) for more comprehensive information about contributing documentation.

### quickstart: local setup

#### Option 1: Manual setup

* __Check the prerequisites__
    1. Create a clean Python (>=3.10) environment (e.g., with conda).
    1. In that environment, create an editable `napari` installation with the `docs` [dependency group](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/dependency-groups/) and a Qt backend. For example, after first forking and cloning the main `napari` project if you've not previously done so, run `python -m pip install -e ".[pyqt]" --group docs` from your `napari/napari` clone directory. This will use the default Qt backend.
    1. Fork *this* repository, `napari/docs`, and then clone your fork to your local machine. NB: you may want to name your fork e.g. `napari-docs` rather than just `docs`.
* __Build__ locally
    * If you're building on Windows, a few extra steps are required; you can follow [this guide](https://napari.org/dev/developers/contributing/documentation/index.html#building-the-documentation-on-windows).
    * From the root of your local clone of this repository, run one of these:
        * `make html`, for a full build, including the example gallery
        * `make html-noplot`, for a full build without building the example gallery
        * `make slimfast`, for a *fast, parallel* build of only sources in the `docs` repository, with no notebook cell outputs and no example gallery.  
  
        Note: `-live` variants of these are available to auto-build when edited files are saved, e.g. `slimfast-live`. For more options, see [the documentation](https://napari.org/dev/developers/contributing/documentation/index.html#building-what-you-need).
* __Preview__ locally, either dragging-and-dropping `docs/_build/index.html` into a browser, or deploying a local server with `python3 -m http.server --directory docs/_build`.

These steps should set you up to build and preview your docs contributions on your local machine.
For more detailed instructions and tips, please visit the relevant sections of our [contribution guide](https://napari.org/dev/developers/contributing/documentation/index.html).

#### Option 2: Using pixi (for slimfast builds only)

[Pixi](https://pixi.sh) provides a simple, cross-platform way to quickly build the documentation using the `slimfast` target without manually installing dependencies or cloning the napari source repository.

**Note: This option only supports `make slimfast` builds, and it will clone the main napari repo from the main branch on GitHub into the pixi environment. For docstring changes, full builds with the gallery (`make html`), or other build options, use Option 1.**

1. **[Install pixi](https://pixi.sh/dev/installation/)** (if not already installed):
   ```bash
   # Windows (PowerShell)
   iwr -useb https://pixi.sh/install.ps1 | iex
   
   # macOS/Linux
   curl -fsSL https://pixi.sh/install.sh | bash
   ```
   
   **Important:** After installation, you need to add pixi to your PATH:
   
   - **Windows**: Restart your PowerShell terminal, or run:
     ```powershell
     $env:Path = [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","Machine") + ";" + [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","User")
     ```
   
   - **macOS/Linux**: Restart your terminal, or run:
     ```bash
     # For bash
     source ~/.bashrc
     
     # For zsh (macOS default since version 10.15 Catalina)
     source ~/.zshrc
     
     # For fish shell
     fish_add_path ~/.pixi/bin
     ```
   
2. **Verify pixi is properly installed** 
   ```bash
   pixi --version
   ```

3. **Clone this repository**:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/napari/docs.git napari-docs
   cd napari-docs
   ```

4. **Install dependencies** (should automatically run for your platform):
   ```bash
   pixi install
   ```

5. **Build the docs** (slimfast only):
   ```bash
   pixi run slimfast
   ```

6. **Preview**: Open `docs/_build/html/index.html` in your browser.

**Notes:**
- The `pixi.toml` is multi-platform; no manual platform selection is required and it should “just work” on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
- If you update pixi, run `pixi install` again to refresh the environment.
- The Makefile includes cross-platform support, so builds work consistently across platforms.

## code of conduct

`napari` has a [Code of Conduct](https://napari.org/community/code_of_conduct.html) that should be honored by everyone who participates in the `napari` community.

## governance

You can learn more about how the `napari` project is organized and managed from our [governance model](https://napari.org/community/governance.html), which includes information about, and ways to contact the [@napari/steering-council and @napari/core-devs](https://napari.org/community/team.html#current-core-developers).

## citing napari

If you find `napari` useful please cite [this repository](https://github.com/napari/napari) using its DOI as follows:

> napari contributors (2019). napari: a multi-dimensional image viewer for python. [doi:10.5281/zenodo.3555620](https://zenodo.org/record/3555620)

Note this DOI will resolve to all versions of napari. To cite a specific version please find the
DOI of that version on our [zenodo page](https://zenodo.org/record/3555620). The DOI of the latest version is in the badge at the top of this page.

## help

We're a community partner on the [image.sc forum](https://forum.image.sc/tags/napari) and all help and support requests should be posted on the forum with the tag `napari`. We look forward to interacting with you there.

Bug reports should be made on our [github issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new?template=bug_report.md) using
the bug report template. If you think something isn't working, don't hesitate to reach out - it is probably us and not you!

## institutional and funding partners

<picture>
  <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://chanzuckerberg.com/wp-content/themes/czi/img/logo-white.svg">
  <img alt="CZI logo" src="https://chanzuckerberg.com/wp-content/themes/czi/img/logo.svg">
</picture>

Commit message:

Expanded the Pixi implementation to support all make commands on all platforms (specifically Windows as well). WSL is no longer required.

README.md, after:

# napari docs

This repository contains the sources for the napari documentation. This includes tutorials, how-tos and other narrative documentation. The autogenerated API documentation is extracted from the source code docstrings, which live on https://github.com/napari/napari

## mission, values, and roadmap

For more information about our plans for `napari` you can read our [mission and values statement](https://napari.org/community/mission_and_values.html), which includes more details on our vision for supporting a plugin ecosystem around napari.
You can see details of [the project roadmap here](https://napari.org/roadmaps/index.html).

## contributing

Contributions are encouraged! If you're new or unsure about anything check out our [issues tracker](https://github.com/napari/docs/issues) or reach out on [zulip](https://napari.zulipchat.com/) before jumping in.
It's nice to be able preview how your contribution will look on the web, so here we provide a brief summary of what's required for a local setup that will allow you to do so.
Alternatively, our CI setup provides a preview link that shows your changes.
Please read our [contributing guide](https://napari.org/dev/developers/contributing/documentation/index.html) for more comprehensive information about contributing documentation.

### quickstart: local setup

#### Option 1: Manual setup

* __Check the prerequisites__
    1. Create a clean Python (>=3.10) environment (e.g., with conda).
    1. In that environment, create an editable `napari` installation with the `docs` [dependency group](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/dependency-groups/) and a Qt backend. For example, after first forking and cloning the main `napari` project if you've not previously done so, run `python -m pip install -e ".[pyqt]" --group docs` from your `napari/napari` clone directory. This will use the default Qt backend.
    1. Fork *this* repository, `napari/docs`, and then clone your fork to your local machine. NB: you may want to name your fork e.g. `napari-docs` rather than just `docs`.
* __Build__ locally
    * If you're building on Windows, a few extra steps are required; you can follow [this guide](https://napari.org/dev/developers/contributing/documentation/index.html#building-the-documentation-on-windows).
    * From the root of your local clone of this repository, run one of these:
        * `make html`, for a full build, including the example gallery
        * `make html-noplot`, for a full build without building the example gallery
        * `make slimfast`, for a *fast, parallel* build of only sources in the `docs` repository, with no notebook cell outputs and no example gallery.  
  
        Note: `-live` variants of these are available to auto-build when edited files are saved, e.g. `slimfast-live`. For more options, see [the documentation](https://napari.org/dev/developers/contributing/documentation/index.html#building-what-you-need).
* __Preview__ locally, either dragging-and-dropping `docs/_build/index.html` into a browser, or deploying a local server with `python3 -m http.server --directory docs/_build`.

These steps should set you up to build and preview your docs contributions on your local machine.
For more detailed instructions and tips, please visit the relevant sections of our [contribution guide](https://napari.org/dev/developers/contributing/documentation/index.html).

#### Option 2: Using pixi

[Pixi](https://pixi.sh) provides a simple, cross-platform way to quickly build the documentation without manually installing dependencies or cloning the napari source repository.

**Note: This option will clone the main napari repo from the main branch on GitHub into the pixi environment. For docstring changes in your local napari clone, use Option 1.**

1. **[Install pixi](https://pixi.sh/dev/installation/)** (if not already installed):
   ```bash
   # Windows (PowerShell)
   iwr -useb https://pixi.sh/install.ps1 | iex
   
   # macOS/Linux
   curl -fsSL https://pixi.sh/install.sh | bash
   ```
   
   **Important:** After installation, you need to add pixi to your PATH:
   
   - **Windows**: Restart your PowerShell terminal, or run:
     ```powershell
     $env:Path = [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","Machine") + ";" + [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","User")
     ```
   
   - **macOS/Linux**: Restart your terminal, or run:
     ```bash
     # For bash
     source ~/.bashrc
     
     # For zsh (macOS default since version 10.15 Catalina)
     source ~/.zshrc
     
     # For fish shell
     fish_add_path ~/.pixi/bin
     ```
   
2. **Verify pixi is properly installed** 
   ```bash
   pixi --version
   ```

3. **Clone this repository**:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/napari/docs.git napari-docs
   cd napari-docs
   ```

4. **Install dependencies** (automatically detects your platform):
   ```bash
   pixi install
   ```

5. **Build the docs** using one of these commands:
   ```bash
   # Fast, parallel build (recommended for development)
   pixi run slimfast
   
   # Full build with example gallery
   pixi run html
   
   # Full build without gallery
   pixi run html-noplot
   
   # Auto-rebuild on file changes
   pixi run slimfast-live
   ```
   
   For more build options, see `pixi task list`.

6. **Preview**: Open `docs/_build/html/index.html` in your browser, or run:
   ```bash
   python3 -m http.server --directory docs/_build/html
   ```

**Notes:**
- pixi requires `make` to be installed on your computer. 
- The `pixi.toml` is multi-platform for Windows, Linux, MacOS (both Intel and Apple Silicon).
- All build targets have cross-platform support in the Makefile.
- To clean build artifacts, run: `pixi run clean`
- If you update pixi, run `pixi install` again to refresh the environment.

## code of conduct

`napari` has a [Code of Conduct](https://napari.org/community/code_of_conduct.html) that should be honored by everyone who participates in the `napari` community.

## governance

You can learn more about how the `napari` project is organized and managed from our [governance model](https://napari.org/community/governance.html), which includes information about, and ways to contact the [@napari/steering-council and @napari/core-devs](https://napari.org/community/team.html#current-core-developers).

## citing napari

If you find `napari` useful please cite [this repository](https://github.com/napari/napari) using its DOI as follows:

> napari contributors (2019). napari: a multi-dimensional image viewer for python. [doi:10.5281/zenodo.3555620](https://zenodo.org/record/3555620)

Note this DOI will resolve to all versions of napari. To cite a specific version please find the
DOI of that version on our [zenodo page](https://zenodo.org/record/3555620). The DOI of the latest version is in the badge at the top of this page.

## help

We're a community partner on the [image.sc forum](https://forum.image.sc/tags/napari) and all help and support requests should be posted on the forum with the tag `napari`. We look forward to interacting with you there.

Bug reports should be made on our [github issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new?template=bug_report.md) using
the bug report template. If you think something isn't working, don't hesitate to reach out - it is probably us and not you!

## institutional and funding partners

<picture>
  <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://chanzuckerberg.com/wp-content/themes/czi/img/logo-white.svg">
  <img alt="CZI logo" src="https://chanzuckerberg.com/wp-content/themes/czi/img/logo.svg">
</picture>
