docs/plugins/advanced_topics/index.md, before:

# Advanced Topics

Some plugin developers may find more **in-depth, technical information** helpful. This section describes topics, such as:
- specifications for napari's plugin ecosystem using the plugin engine `npe2`.
- migration to `npe2` from the deprecated napari plugin engine v1.

## npe2: napari plugin engine v2

::::{grid}
:::{grid-item-card} npe2 manifest reference
:link: plugin-manifest
:link-type: ref

A reference for the `npe2` manifest file, which is used to define the plugin and its contributions.

:::

:::{grid-item-card} `npe2` contributions reference
:link: contributions-ref
:link-type: ref

A technical specification for how plugins can contribute additional functionality and features to napari.

:::
::::

## Deprecated: napari plugin engine v1

:::{important}
New plugins should use the `npe2` standard.
We encourage first generation plugin authors to migrate their plugin to the `npe2` standard.
:::

::::{grid}
:::{grid-item-card} Napari plugin engine v1 reference
:link: napari-plugin-engine
:link-type: ref

These documents provide background on the first generation plugin system which is now deprecated.

:::

:::{grid-item-card} Migration guide to `npe2`
:link: npe2-migration-guide
:link-type: ref
Have a plugin written for the first generation plugin system? This guide will help you migrate to the `npe2` plugin system.

:::

::::

Commit message:

Add guidance document for adapted npe1 plugins (#597)
# References and relevant issues


# Description
This doc explains the changes in 0.6.0 regarding the `Use npe2 adaptor`
setting, how it might affect plugins, and what users and plugin
developers should do before 0.7.0.

<!-- Final Checklist
- If images included: I have added [alt
text](https://webaim.org/techniques/alttext/)
If workflow, documentation build or deployment change:
- My PR is the minimum possible work for the desired functionality
- I have commented my code, to let others know what it does
-->

---------

Co-authored-by: Draga Doncila <ddon0001@student.monash.edu>
Co-authored-by: Peter Sobolewski <76622105+psobolewskiPhD@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Melissa Weber Mendonça <melissawm@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: Carol Willing <carolcode@willingconsulting.com>

docs/plugins/advanced_topics/index.md, after:

# Advanced Topics

```{warning}
In napari 0.6.0 we have made some changes to napari's default behaviour when validating legacy "npe1" plugins.
You may see a warning when starting `napari` if you have legacy "npe1" plugins installed.
You can learn more about this change in the [Changes to the plugin engine in 0.6.0](adapted-plugin-guide) document.
```

Some plugin developers may find more **in-depth, technical information** helpful. This section describes topics, such as:
- specifications for napari's plugin ecosystem using the plugin engine `npe2`.
- migration to `npe2` from the deprecated napari plugin engine v1.

## npe2: napari plugin engine v2

::::{grid}
:::{grid-item-card} npe2 manifest reference
:link: plugin-manifest
:link-type: ref

A reference for the `npe2` manifest file, which is used to define the plugin and its contributions.

:::

:::{grid-item-card} `npe2` contributions reference
:link: contributions-ref
:link-type: ref

A technical specification for how plugins can contribute additional functionality and features to napari.

:::
::::

## Deprecated: napari plugin engine v1

:::{important}
New plugins should use the `npe2` standard.
We encourage first generation plugin authors to migrate their plugin to the `npe2` standard.
:::

::::{grid}
:::{grid-item-card} Napari plugin engine v1 reference
:link: napari-plugin-engine
:link-type: ref

These documents provide background on the first generation plugin system which is now deprecated.

:::

:::{grid-item-card} Migration guide to `npe2`
:link: npe2-migration-guide
:link-type: ref
Have a plugin written for the first generation plugin system? This guide will help you migrate to the `npe2` plugin system.

:::

::::
