docs/developers/contributing/ai.md, before:


(ai-contributions)=

# AI use policy and guidelines

## tldr

We are humans who enjoy working with other humans. You may use whatever
tools you like, but you are ultimately responsible for the changes you submit.
Don't submit changes you haven't carefully read through yourself, and let us
have a conversation with you, not a chatbot.

## Introduction

Our goal in napari is to develop excellent software.
This requires careful attention to detail in every change we
integrate. Maintainer time and attention is very limited, so it's
important that changes you ask us to review represent
your _best_ work.

You can use any tools that help you understand the napari codebase and
write good code, including AI tools. However, as noted above, you
always need to make a sincere effort to understand and explain the changes
you're proposing, whether or not you used an LLM as part of your process to
produce them. The answer to "Why is X an improvement?" should never be
"I'm not sure. The AI did it."

::: warning
**Do not allow AI agents to submit PRs for you**, and **do not submit an
AI-generated PR you haven't personally understood and tested**, as this wastes
maintainers' time. PRs that appear to violate this guideline will be closed
without review.
:::

## Using AI as a coding assistant

1. Don't skip **becoming familiar with the part of the codebase**
   you're working on. This will let you write better prompts and
   validate their output if you use an LLM. Code assistants can be a
   useful search engine/discovery tool in this process, but don't
   trust claims they make about how napari works. LLMs are often wrong,
   even about details that are clearly answered in the napari
   documentation.
2. Try to submit your changes in small, self-contained pull requests,
   even if an LLM generates them all in one go.
3. Don't simply ask an LLM to add **code comments**, as it will likely
   produce a bunch of text that unnecessarily explains what's already
   clear from the code. If using an LLM to generate comments, be
   really specific in your request, demand succinctness, and carefully
   edit the result.

## Using AI for communication

As noted above, napari's contributors are expected to communicate with
intention, to avoid wasting maintainer time with long, sloppy
writing. We strongly prefer clear and concise communication about
points that actually require discussion over long AI-generated
comments.

When you use an LLM to write a message for you, it remains **your
responsibility** to read through the whole thing and make sure that it
makes sense to you and represents your ideas concisely. A good rule
of thumb is that if you can't make yourself carefully read some LLM
output that you generated, nobody else will want to read it either.

Here are some concrete guidelines for using LLMs as part of your communication
workflows.

1. When writing a pull request description, **do not include anything that's
   obvious** from looking at your changes directly (e.g., files changed, functions
   updated, etc.). Instead, focus on the _why_ behind your changes. Don't ask an
   LLM to generate a PR description on your behalf based on your code changes,
   as it will simply regurgitate the information that's already there.
2. Similarly, when responding to a pull request comment, **explain _your_
   reasoning**. Don't prompt an LLM to re-describe what can already be seen from
   the code.
3. Verify that **everything you write is accurate**, whether or not an LLM
   generated any part of it. napari's maintainers will be unable to review your
   contributions if you misrepresent your work (e.g., misdescribing your code
   changes, their effect, or your testing process).
4. Complete all parts of the **PR description template**, including screenshots
   and the submission checklist. Don't simply overwrite the template with LLM
   output.
5. **Clarity and succinctness** are much more important than perfect grammar, so
   you shouldn't feel obliged to pass your writing through an LLM. If you do ask
   an LLM to clean up your writing style, be sure it does _not_ make it longer
   in the process. Demand succinctness in your prompt.
6. Quoting an LLM answer is usually less helpful than linking to
   **relevant primary sources**, like source code or reference
   documentation. If you do need to quote an LLM
   answer in a napari conversation, put the answer in a
   [quote block](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax#quoting-text), 
   to clearly distinguish LLM output from your own thoughts.

## Acknowledgements

*This guide is copied with minor modifications from the
[Zulip policy on AI use](https://github.com/zulip/zulip/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#ai-use-policy-and-guidelines).
We once again thank the Zulip team for their work in support of open source.*

Commit message:

Add note about reaching out on Zulip

docs/developers/contributing/ai.md, after:


(ai-contributions)=

# AI use policy and guidelines

## tldr

We are humans who enjoy working with other humans. You may use whatever
tools you like, but you are ultimately responsible for the changes you submit.
Don't submit changes you haven't carefully read through yourself, and let us
have a conversation with you, not a chatbot.

## Introduction

Our goal in napari is to develop excellent software.
This requires careful attention to detail in every change we
integrate. Maintainer time and attention is very limited, so it's
important that changes you ask us to review represent
your _best_ work.

You can use any tools that help you understand the napari codebase and
write good code, including AI tools. However, as noted above, you
always need to make a sincere effort to understand and explain the changes
you're proposing, whether or not you used an LLM as part of your process to
produce them. The answer to "Why is X an improvement?" should never be
"I'm not sure. The AI did it."

::: warning
**Do not allow AI agents to submit PRs for you**, and **do not submit an
AI-generated PR you haven't personally understood and tested**, as this wastes
maintainers' time. PRs that appear to violate this guideline will be closed
without review.
:::

## Using AI as a coding assistant

1. Don't skip **becoming familiar with the part of the codebase**
   you're working on. This will let you write better prompts and
   validate their output if you use an LLM. Code assistants can be a
   useful search engine/discovery tool in this process, but don't
   trust claims they make about how napari works. LLMs are often wrong,
   even about details that are clearly answered in the napari
   documentation. When in doubt, please reach out to us on our
   [Zulip chat room](https://napari.zulipchat.com).
2. Try to submit your changes in small, self-contained pull requests,
   even if an LLM generates them all in one go.
3. Don't simply ask an LLM to add **code comments**, as it will likely
   produce a bunch of text that unnecessarily explains what's already
   clear from the code. If using an LLM to generate comments, be
   really specific in your request, demand succinctness, and carefully
   edit the result.

## Using AI for communication

As noted above, napari's contributors are expected to communicate with
intention, to avoid wasting maintainer time with long, sloppy
writing. We strongly prefer clear and concise communication about
points that actually require discussion over long AI-generated
comments.

When you use an LLM to write a message for you, it remains **your
responsibility** to read through the whole thing and make sure that it
makes sense to you and represents your ideas concisely. A good rule
of thumb is that if you can't make yourself carefully read some LLM
output that you generated, nobody else will want to read it either.

Here are some concrete guidelines for using LLMs as part of your communication
workflows.

1. When writing a pull request description, **do not include anything that's
   obvious** from looking at your changes directly (e.g., files changed, functions
   updated, etc.). Instead, focus on the _why_ behind your changes. Don't ask an
   LLM to generate a PR description on your behalf based on your code changes,
   as it will simply regurgitate the information that's already there.
2. Similarly, when responding to a pull request comment, **explain _your_
   reasoning**. Don't prompt an LLM to re-describe what can already be seen from
   the code.
3. Verify that **everything you write is accurate**, whether or not an LLM
   generated any part of it. napari's maintainers will be unable to review your
   contributions if you misrepresent your work (e.g., misdescribing your code
   changes, their effect, or your testing process).
4. Complete all parts of the **PR description template**, including screenshots
   and the submission checklist. Don't simply overwrite the template with LLM
   output.
5. **Clarity and succinctness** are much more important than perfect grammar, so
   you shouldn't feel obliged to pass your writing through an LLM. If you do ask
   an LLM to clean up your writing style, be sure it does _not_ make it longer
   in the process. Demand succinctness in your prompt.
6. Quoting an LLM answer is usually less helpful than linking to
   **relevant primary sources**, like source code or reference
   documentation. If you do need to quote an LLM
   answer in a napari conversation, put the answer in a
   [quote block](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax#quoting-text), 
   to clearly distinguish LLM output from your own thoughts.

## Acknowledgements

*This guide is copied with minor modifications from the
[Zulip policy on AI use](https://github.com/zulip/zulip/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#ai-use-policy-and-guidelines).
We once again thank the Zulip team for their work in support of open source.*
