docs/developers/contributing/testing.md, before:

(napari-testing)=
# Testing

## Overview

We use unit tests, integration tests, and functional tests to ensure that
`napari` works as intended. We have

- Unit tests which test if individual modules or functions work correctly
in isolation.

- Integration tests which test if different modules or functions work properly
when combined.

- Functional tests which test if slices of `napari` functionality work as
intended in the whole system.

To get the most return on investment (ROI) from our coding, we strive to test as
much as we can with unit tests, requiring fewer integration tests, and the least number
of functional tests as depicted in the test pyramid below from
[softwaretestinghelp.com](https://www.softwaretestinghelp.com/the-difference-between-unit-integration-and-functional-testing/):

![Pyramid diagram depicting the relationship between time to write/execute three different types of tests and return on investment for those tests.  The pyramid is split into three sections: the bottom, largest section is Unit testing, the middle section is Integration testing and the top is Functional testing. The size of the section is proportional to the quantity of tests of that type you should write. Moving up the pyramid, tests take longer to write and have a lower return on investment.](../../images/tests.png)

Unit tests are at the base of the pyramid because they are the easiest to write and
the quickest to run. The time and effort to implement and maintain tests increases
from unit tests to integration and functional tests.

(test-organization)=

## Test organization

All of `napari` tests are located in folders named `_tests`. We keep our unit
tests located in the individual folders with the modules or functions they are
testing (e.g. the tests for the `Image` layer are located in
[`/napari/layers/image/_tests`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/layers/image/_tests)
alongside the `Image` layer code).
Our integration and functional tests are located in
the [`napari/_tests`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/_tests)
folder at the top of the repository.

We also strive to unit test as much of our model and utils code independently of
our GUI code. These tests are located in the following folders:

* [`napari/layers`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/layers)
* [`napari/components`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/components)
* [`napari/utils`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/utils)

Our GUI code is tests in the following folders:

* [`napari/_tests`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/_tests)
* [`napari/_qt`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/_qt)
* [`napari/_vispy`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/_vispy)

The tests in these three folders are ignored when we run them in the subset of our
[continuous integration](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_integration)
workflows that run in a headless environment (without a Qt backend).
When we are testing "non-GUI" code in a way that requires a GUI backend, they are
placed here.

The `napari/plugins` folder contains tests related to plugins.

Pytest fixtures to aid testing live in:

* [`napari/conftest.py`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/napari/conftest.py) -
  available globally to all of `napari`.
* [`napari/utils/_testsupport.py`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/napari/utils/_testsupport.py) -
  available globally to all of `napari` **and** to all tests in the same environment
  that `napari` is in (as this file is exported).

There are also fixtures for testing the `napari` builtin plugin (provides contributions
that come builtin with `napari`).
These live in
[`napari_builtins/_tests/conftest.py`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/napari_builtins/_tests/conftest.py)
and are available within
[`napari_builtins/_tests`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari_builtins/_tests).

(running-tests)=

## Running tests

To run our test suite locally, run `pytest` on the command line.  If, for some reason
you don't already have the test requirements in your environment, run `python -m pip install -e .[testing]`.

There are some tests that require showing GUI elements, (such
as testing screenshots). By default, these are only run during continuous integration.
If you'd like to include them in local tests, set the environment variable "CI":

```sh
CI=1 pytest
```

It is also possible to run test using `tox`. This is the same way as it is done in CI.
The main difference is that tox will create a virtual environment for each test environment, so it will take more time
but it will be more similar to the CI environment.

```sh
tox -e py310-linux-pyqt5
```

To get list of all available environments run:

```sh
tox list
```

### Running tests without pop-up windows

Some tests create visible napari viewers, which pop up on your monitor then quickly disappear.
This can be annoying if you are trying to use your computer while the tests are running.
There are two ways to avoid this:

1. Use the `QT_QPA_PLATFORM=offscreen` environment variable.
This tells Qt to render windows "offscreen", which is slower but will avoid the pop-ups.
   ```shell
   QT_QPA_PLATFORM=offscreen pytest napari
   ```
   or
   ```shell
   QT_QPA_PLATFORM=offscreen tox -e py310-linux-pyqt5
   ```

2. If you are using Linux or WSL, you can use the `xvfb-run` command.
   This will run the tests in a virtual X server.
   ```sh
   xvfb-run pytest napari
   ```
   or
   ```sh
   xvfb-run tox -e py310-linux-pyqt5
   ```

where the tox environment selector `py310-linux-pyqt5` must match your OS and Python version.

### Tips for speeding up local testing

Very often when developing new code, you don't need or want to run the entire test suite (which can take many minutes to finish).  With `pytest`, it's easy to run a subset of your tests:

```sh
# run tests in a specific subdirectory
pytest napari/components
# run tests in a specific file
pytest napari/components/_tests/test_add_layers.py
# run a specific test within a specific file
pytest napari/components/_tests/test_add_layers.py::test_add_layers_with_plugins
# select tests based on substring match of test name:
pytest napari/layers/ -k 'points and not bindings'
```

In general, it pays to learn a few of the [tips and tricks](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/example/index.html) of running pytest.

### Testing coverage locally

We always aim for good [test coverage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_coverage) and we use [codecov](https://app.codecov.io/gh/napari/napari) during continuous integration to make sure we maintain good coverage.  If you'd like to test coverage locally as you develop new code, you can install [`pytest-cov`](https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-cov) and take advantage of a few handy commands:

```sh
# run the full test suite with coverage
pytest --cov=napari
# instead of coverage in the console, get a nice browser-based cov-report
pytest --cov=napari --cov-report=html
open htmlcov/index.html  # look at the report
# run a subset of tests with coverage
pytest --cov=napari.layers.shapes --cov-report=html napari/layers/shapes
open htmlcov/index.html  # look at the report
```

## Writing tests

Writing tests for new code is a critical part of keeping napari maintainable as
it grows. Tests are written in files whose names
begin with `test_*` and which are contained in one of the `_tests` directories.

### Property-based testing with Hypothesis

Property-based tests allow you to test that "for any X, ..." - with a much nicer
developer experience than using truly random data.  We use Hypothesis for unit or
integration tests where there are simple properties like `x == load(save(x))` or
when Napari implements a function we can check against the equivalent in a trusted
library for at least some inputs.

See also [this paper on property-based testing in science](https://conference.scipy.org/proceedings/scipy2020/zac_hatfield-dodds.html),
[issue #2444](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/2444), and
[the Hypothesis documentation](https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
(including [Numpy support](https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/numpy.html)).

(testing-qt)=

### Testing with `Qt` and `napari.Viewer`

There are a couple things to keep in mind when writing a test where a `Qt` event
loop or a `napari.Viewer` is required.  The important thing is that any widgets
you create during testing need to be cleaned up at the end of each test:

1. If you need a `QApplication` to be running for your test, you can use the
   [`qtbot`](https://pytest-qt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html#pytestqt.qtbot.QtBot) fixture from `pytest-qt`

    > note: fixtures in pytest can be a little mysterious, since it's not always
    > clear where they are coming from.  In this case, using a pytest-qt fixture
    > looks like this:

    ```python
    # just by putting `qtbot` in the list of arguments
    # pytest-qt will start up an event loop for you
    def test_something(qtbot):
        ...
    ```

   `qtbot` provides a convenient
   [`addWidget`](https://pytest-qt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html#pytestqt.qtbot.QtBot.addWidget)
   method that will ensure that the widget gets closed at the end of the test.
   It *also* provides a whole bunch of other
   convenient methods for interacting with your GUI tests (clicking, waiting
   signals, etc...).  See the [`qtbot` docs](https://pytest-qt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html#pytestqt.qtbot.QtBot) for details.

    ```python
    # the qtbot provides convenience methods like addWidget
    def test_something_else(qtbot):
        widget = QWidget()
        qtbot.addWidget(widget)  # tell qtbot to clean this widget later
        ...
    ```

2. When writing a test that requires a `napari.Viewer` object, we provide a
   [pytest fixture](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/explanation/fixtures.html) called
   `make_napari_viewer` that will take care of creating a viewer and cleaning up
   at the end of the test.  When using this function, it is **not** necessary to
   use a `qtbot` fixture, nor should you do any additional cleanup (such as
   using `qtbot.addWidget` or calling `viewer.close()`) at the end of the test.
   Duplicate cleanup may cause an error.  Use the fixture as follows:

    ```python
    # the make_napari_viewer fixture is defined in napari/utils/_testsupport.py
    def test_something_with_a_viewer(make_napari_viewer):
        # make_napari_viewer takes any keyword arguments that napari.Viewer() takes
        viewer = make_napari_viewer()

        # do stuff with the viewer, no qtbot or viewer.close() methods needed.
        ...
    ```

> If you're curious to see the actual `make_napari_viewer` fixture definition, it's
> in [`napari/utils/_testsupport.py`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/napari/utils/_testsupport.py).

#### Skipping tests that show GUI elements

Tests that require showing GUI elements should be marked with `skip_local_popups`.
This is so they can be excluded and run only during continuous integration (see
[](running-tests) for details).

#### Testing `QWidget` visibility

When checking that `QWidget` visibility is updated correctly, you may need to use
[`qtbot.waitUntil`](https://pytest-qt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html#pytestqt.qtbot.QtBot.waitUntil) or
[`qtbot.waitExposed`](https://pytest-qt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html#pytestqt.qtbot.QtBot.waitExposed) (see [](testing-qt) for details on `qtbot`).
This is because visibility can take some time to change.

For example, the following code can be used to check that a widget correctly
appears after it is created.

```python
from qtpy.QtWidgets import QWidget


def test_widget_hidden(make_napari_viewer, qtbot):
    """Check widget visibility correctly updated after hide."""
    # create viewer and make it visible
    viewer = make_napari_viewer(show=True)
    viewer.window.add_dock_widget(QWidget(viewer), name='test')
    widget = viewer.window._dock_widgets['test']
    # wait until the `widget` appears
    qtbot.waitUntil(widget.isVisible)
    assert widget.isVisible()
```

Note that we need to make the `viewer` visible when creating it as we are checking
visibility. Additionally, you can set the timeout for `qtbot.waitUntil` (default is 5
seconds).

Another function that may be useful for testing `QWidget` visibility is
[`QWidget.isVisibleTo`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qwidget.html#isVisibleTo), which
tells you if a widget is visible relative to an ancestor.

### Mocking: "Fake it till you make it"

It can be confusing to write unit tests for individual functions, when the
function being tested in turn depends on the output from some other function or
method.  This makes it tempting to write integration tests that "just test the
whole thing together".  A useful tool in this case is the [mock object
library](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.mock.html).  "Mocking" lets
you patch or replace parts of the code being tested with "fake" behavior or
return values, so that you can test how a given function would perform *if* it
were to receive some value from the upstream code.  For a few examples of using
mocks when testing napari, search the codebase for
[`unittest.mock`](https://github.com/napari/napari/search?q=%22unittest.mock%22&type=Code)

## Known issues

There are several known issues with displaying GUI tests on windows in CI, and
so certain tests have been disabled from windows in CI, see
[#1377](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/1377) for more discussion.

Commit message:

Add info about test that require window focus

docs/developers/contributing/testing.md, after:

(napari-testing)=
# Testing

## Overview

We use unit tests, integration tests, and functional tests to ensure that
`napari` works as intended. We have

- Unit tests which test if individual modules or functions work correctly
in isolation.

- Integration tests which test if different modules or functions work properly
when combined.

- Functional tests which test if slices of `napari` functionality work as
intended in the whole system.

To get the most return on investment (ROI) from our coding, we strive to test as
much as we can with unit tests, requiring fewer integration tests, and the least number
of functional tests as depicted in the test pyramid below from
[softwaretestinghelp.com](https://www.softwaretestinghelp.com/the-difference-between-unit-integration-and-functional-testing/):

![Pyramid diagram depicting the relationship between time to write/execute three different types of tests and return on investment for those tests.  The pyramid is split into three sections: the bottom, largest section is Unit testing, the middle section is Integration testing and the top is Functional testing. The size of the section is proportional to the quantity of tests of that type you should write. Moving up the pyramid, tests take longer to write and have a lower return on investment.](../../images/tests.png)

Unit tests are at the base of the pyramid because they are the easiest to write and
the quickest to run. The time and effort to implement and maintain tests increases
from unit tests to integration and functional tests.

(test-organization)=

## Test organization

All of `napari` tests are located in folders named `_tests`. We keep our unit
tests located in the individual folders with the modules or functions they are
testing (e.g. the tests for the `Image` layer are located in
[`/napari/layers/image/_tests`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/layers/image/_tests)
alongside the `Image` layer code).
Our integration and functional tests are located in
the [`napari/_tests`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/_tests)
folder at the top of the repository.

We also strive to unit test as much of our model and utils code independently of
our GUI code. These tests are located in the following folders:

* [`napari/layers`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/layers)
* [`napari/components`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/components)
* [`napari/utils`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/utils)

Our GUI code is tests in the following folders:

* [`napari/_tests`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/_tests)
* [`napari/_qt`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/_qt)
* [`napari/_vispy`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari/_vispy)

The tests in these three folders are ignored when we run them in the subset of our
[continuous integration](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_integration)
workflows that run in a headless environment (without a Qt backend).
When we are testing "non-GUI" code in a way that requires a GUI backend, they are
placed here.

The `napari/plugins` folder contains tests related to plugins.

Pytest fixtures to aid testing live in:

* [`napari/conftest.py`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/napari/conftest.py) -
  available globally to all of `napari`.
* [`napari/utils/_testsupport.py`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/napari/utils/_testsupport.py) -
  available globally to all of `napari` **and** to all tests in the same environment
  that `napari` is in (as this file is exported).

There are also fixtures for testing the `napari` builtin plugin (provides contributions
that come builtin with `napari`).
These live in
[`napari_builtins/_tests/conftest.py`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/napari_builtins/_tests/conftest.py)
and are available within
[`napari_builtins/_tests`](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/napari_builtins/_tests).

(running-tests)=

## Running tests

To run our test suite locally, run `pytest` on the command line.  If, for some reason
you don't already have the test requirements in your environment, run `python -m pip install -e .[testing]`.

There are some tests that require showing GUI elements (such
as testing screenshots) and window focus (such as testing drag and drop behavior). By default, these are only run during continuous integration.
If you'd like to include them in local tests, set the environment variable "CI":

```sh
CI=1 pytest
```

 Also, if running the tests on macOS, be sure to give the Terminal app `Accessibility` permissions in `System Settings > Privacy & Security > Accessibility` (needed for some tests that rely on `pyautogui`).

It is also possible to run test using `tox`. This is the same way as it is done in CI.
The main difference is that tox will create a virtual environment for each test environment, so it will take more time
but it will be more similar to the CI environment.

```sh
tox -e py310-linux-pyqt5
```

To get list of all available environments run:

```sh
tox list
```

### Running tests without pop-up windows

Some tests create visible napari viewers, which pop up on your monitor then quickly disappear.
This can be annoying if you are trying to use your computer while the tests are running.
There are two ways to avoid this:

1. Use the `QT_QPA_PLATFORM=offscreen` environment variable.
This tells Qt to render windows "offscreen", which is slower but will avoid the pop-ups.
   ```shell
   QT_QPA_PLATFORM=offscreen pytest napari
   ```
   or
   ```shell
   QT_QPA_PLATFORM=offscreen tox -e py310-linux-pyqt5
   ```

2. If you are using Linux or WSL, you can use the `xvfb-run` command.
   This will run the tests in a virtual X server.
   ```sh
   xvfb-run pytest napari
   ```
   or
   ```sh
   xvfb-run tox -e py310-linux-pyqt5
   ```

where the tox environment selector `py310-linux-pyqt5` must match your OS and Python version.

### Tips for speeding up local testing

Very often when developing new code, you don't need or want to run the entire test suite (which can take many minutes to finish).  With `pytest`, it's easy to run a subset of your tests:

```sh
# run tests in a specific subdirectory
pytest napari/components
# run tests in a specific file
pytest napari/components/_tests/test_add_layers.py
# run a specific test within a specific file
pytest napari/components/_tests/test_add_layers.py::test_add_layers_with_plugins
# select tests based on substring match of test name:
pytest napari/layers/ -k 'points and not bindings'
```

In general, it pays to learn a few of the [tips and tricks](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/example/index.html) of running pytest.

### Testing coverage locally

We always aim for good [test coverage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_coverage) and we use [codecov](https://app.codecov.io/gh/napari/napari) during continuous integration to make sure we maintain good coverage.  If you'd like to test coverage locally as you develop new code, you can install [`pytest-cov`](https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-cov) and take advantage of a few handy commands:

```sh
# run the full test suite with coverage
pytest --cov=napari
# instead of coverage in the console, get a nice browser-based cov-report
pytest --cov=napari --cov-report=html
open htmlcov/index.html  # look at the report
# run a subset of tests with coverage
pytest --cov=napari.layers.shapes --cov-report=html napari/layers/shapes
open htmlcov/index.html  # look at the report
```

## Writing tests

Writing tests for new code is a critical part of keeping napari maintainable as
it grows. Tests are written in files whose names
begin with `test_*` and which are contained in one of the `_tests` directories.

### Property-based testing with Hypothesis

Property-based tests allow you to test that "for any X, ..." - with a much nicer
developer experience than using truly random data.  We use Hypothesis for unit or
integration tests where there are simple properties like `x == load(save(x))` or
when Napari implements a function we can check against the equivalent in a trusted
library for at least some inputs.

See also [this paper on property-based testing in science](https://conference.scipy.org/proceedings/scipy2020/zac_hatfield-dodds.html),
[issue #2444](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/2444), and
[the Hypothesis documentation](https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
(including [Numpy support](https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/numpy.html)).

(testing-qt)=

### Testing with `Qt` and `napari.Viewer`

There are a couple things to keep in mind when writing a test where a `Qt` event
loop or a `napari.Viewer` is required.  The important thing is that any widgets
you create during testing need to be cleaned up at the end of each test:

1. If you need a `QApplication` to be running for your test, you can use the
   [`qtbot`](https://pytest-qt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html#pytestqt.qtbot.QtBot) fixture from `pytest-qt`

    > note: fixtures in pytest can be a little mysterious, since it's not always
    > clear where they are coming from.  In this case, using a pytest-qt fixture
    > looks like this:

    ```python
    # just by putting `qtbot` in the list of arguments
    # pytest-qt will start up an event loop for you
    def test_something(qtbot):
        ...
    ```

   `qtbot` provides a convenient
   [`addWidget`](https://pytest-qt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html#pytestqt.qtbot.QtBot.addWidget)
   method that will ensure that the widget gets closed at the end of the test.
   It *also* provides a whole bunch of other
   convenient methods for interacting with your GUI tests (clicking, waiting
   signals, etc...).  See the [`qtbot` docs](https://pytest-qt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html#pytestqt.qtbot.QtBot) for details.

    ```python
    # the qtbot provides convenience methods like addWidget
    def test_something_else(qtbot):
        widget = QWidget()
        qtbot.addWidget(widget)  # tell qtbot to clean this widget later
        ...
    ```

2. When writing a test that requires a `napari.Viewer` object, we provide a
   [pytest fixture](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/explanation/fixtures.html) called
   `make_napari_viewer` that will take care of creating a viewer and cleaning up
   at the end of the test.  When using this function, it is **not** necessary to
   use a `qtbot` fixture, nor should you do any additional cleanup (such as
   using `qtbot.addWidget` or calling `viewer.close()`) at the end of the test.
   Duplicate cleanup may cause an error.  Use the fixture as follows:

    ```python
    # the make_napari_viewer fixture is defined in napari/utils/_testsupport.py
    def test_something_with_a_viewer(make_napari_viewer):
        # make_napari_viewer takes any keyword arguments that napari.Viewer() takes
        viewer = make_napari_viewer()

        # do stuff with the viewer, no qtbot or viewer.close() methods needed.
        ...
    ```

> If you're curious to see the actual `make_napari_viewer` fixture definition, it's
> in [`napari/utils/_testsupport.py`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/napari/utils/_testsupport.py).

#### Skipping tests that show GUI elements or need window focus

Tests that require showing GUI elements should be marked with `skip_local_popups`. If a test requires window focus, it should be marked with `skip_local_focus`. 
This is so they can be excluded and run only during continuous integration (see [](running-tests) for details).

#### Testing `QWidget` visibility

When checking that `QWidget` visibility is updated correctly, you may need to use
[`qtbot.waitUntil`](https://pytest-qt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html#pytestqt.qtbot.QtBot.waitUntil) or
[`qtbot.waitExposed`](https://pytest-qt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference.html#pytestqt.qtbot.QtBot.waitExposed) (see [](testing-qt) for details on `qtbot`).
This is because visibility can take some time to change.

For example, the following code can be used to check that a widget correctly
appears after it is created.

```python
from qtpy.QtWidgets import QWidget


def test_widget_hidden(make_napari_viewer, qtbot):
    """Check widget visibility correctly updated after hide."""
    # create viewer and make it visible
    viewer = make_napari_viewer(show=True)
    viewer.window.add_dock_widget(QWidget(viewer), name='test')
    widget = viewer.window._dock_widgets['test']
    # wait until the `widget` appears
    qtbot.waitUntil(widget.isVisible)
    assert widget.isVisible()
```

Note that we need to make the `viewer` visible when creating it as we are checking
visibility. Additionally, you can set the timeout for `qtbot.waitUntil` (default is 5
seconds).

Another function that may be useful for testing `QWidget` visibility is
[`QWidget.isVisibleTo`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qwidget.html#isVisibleTo), which
tells you if a widget is visible relative to an ancestor.

### Mocking: "Fake it till you make it"

It can be confusing to write unit tests for individual functions, when the
function being tested in turn depends on the output from some other function or
method.  This makes it tempting to write integration tests that "just test the
whole thing together".  A useful tool in this case is the [mock object
library](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.mock.html).  "Mocking" lets
you patch or replace parts of the code being tested with "fake" behavior or
return values, so that you can test how a given function would perform *if* it
were to receive some value from the upstream code.  For a few examples of using
mocks when testing napari, search the codebase for
[`unittest.mock`](https://github.com/napari/napari/search?q=%22unittest.mock%22&type=Code)

## Known issues

There are several known issues with displaying GUI tests on windows in CI, and
so certain tests have been disabled from windows in CI, see
[#1377](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/1377) for more discussion.
