docs/howtos/index.md, before:

(how-tos)=
# How-to guides

These guides show you how to complete tasks with napari. They assume you have
already installed **napari**, know how to launch the viewer, and are familiar
with its layout. For help with installation see our
[installation tutorial](../tutorials/fundamentals/installation). For help
getting started with the viewer see our
[Getting started guide](../tutorials/fundamentals/getting_started). For
help understanding the organisation of the viewer, including things like the
layers list, the layer properties widgets, the layer control panels, and the
dimension sliders see our [napari viewer](../tutorials/fundamentals/viewer)
tutorial.

- [Using layers](layers/index): Learn about how to use the layers currently
supported by napari.
- [Hooking up your own events](./connecting_events): Learn about the event loop
and how to use it to interact with napari.
- [napari + ImageJ how-to guide](./napari_imageJ): Learn about how to use napari
and ImageJ simultaneously.
- [napari in Docker](./docker): Learn about using napari in docker.
- [Performance monitoring](./perfmon): Learn about how to monitor napari
performance and diagnose potential problems.
- [napari headless](./headless): Tips on how to run napari headlessly.
- [Themes](themes): Changing appearance of the `napari` GUI with your own theme
  and sharing your theme via a plugin.

Commit message:

Add section on extending napari (#286)
# References and relevant issues
closes #244
closes #239

# Description
This was originally meant to be a small PR closing #244, but has been
extended to adding an 'extending napari' section (as it was difficult to
break it up to smaller PRs), loosely based off of @DragaDoncila slides
from
[here](https://github.com/napari/docs/issues/244#issuecomment-1831360814).

* Add 'Extending napari' section under 'How-to guides' - covers widgets,
~intro to event loop~ and how to connect your how events
* "Hooking up your own events" and ~"An introduction to the event loop
in napari"~ pages mostly unchanged, just moved (edit: 'An introduction
to the event loop in napari' will remain where it is, see:
https://github.com/napari/docs/pull/286#discussion_r1418490112)
* Big changes to the "Using magicgui in napari" page:
* This is now documents how to build widgets with magicgui and by
creating a widget class. Also describes how to add widget to the viewer
and how to adapt the widget to be a plugin widget contribution. Adds
more extensive intro.
* Adds lots of cross references to magicgui, the plugins section and the
cookie-cutter

---------

Co-authored-by: Peter Sobolewski <76622105+psobolewskiPhD@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/howtos/index.md, after:

(how-tos)=
# How-to guides

These guides show you how to complete tasks with napari. They assume you have
already installed **napari**, know how to launch the viewer, and are familiar
with its layout. For help with installation see our
[installation tutorial](../tutorials/fundamentals/installation). For help
getting started with the viewer see our
[Getting started guide](../tutorials/fundamentals/getting_started). For
help understanding the organisation of the viewer, including things like the
layers list, the layer properties widgets, the layer control panels, and the
dimension sliders see our [napari viewer](../tutorials/fundamentals/viewer)
tutorial.

- [Using layers](layers/index): Learn about how to use the layers currently
supported by napari.
- [Extending napari](extending-napari): Learn how to extend napari by adding widgets
  and connecting callbacks.
- [napari + ImageJ how-to guide](./napari_imageJ): Learn about how to use napari
and ImageJ simultaneously.
- [napari in Docker](./docker): Learn about using napari in docker.
- [Performance monitoring](./perfmon): Learn about how to monitor napari
performance and diagnose potential problems.
- [napari headless](./headless): Tips on how to run napari headlessly.
- [Themes](themes): Changing appearance of the napari GUI with your own theme
  and sharing your theme via a plugin.
