docs/developers/documentation/index.md, before:

(docs_contributing_guide)=
# Contributing Documentation

This guide will teach you how to submit new documents to napari's usage
documentation.

## Organization of the documentation

The napari documentation is built from sources located at the
[napari/docs](https://github.com/napari/docs) repository on GitHub. That
repository is where all the narrative documentation (e.g. tutorials, how-to
guides) pull requests should be made. Meanwhile, changes to docstrings or to the
[examples gallery](https://napari.org/gallery) should be made to the
[napari/napari](https://github.com/napari/napari) repository.

## Prerequisites

Prerequisites depend on the type of contribution you wish to make. In general,
you will require:

- Some familiarity with [`git`](https://git-scm.com);
- A [GitHub](https://github.com) account.

You should first [fork](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo)
and clone the [napari/docs](https://github.com/napari/docs) repo to your
machine, and navigate to the resulting folder:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:<your-username>/docs.git napari-docs
cd napari-docs/
```

````{note}
To reduce confusion and possible conflicts, the `docs` fork is being cloned into
a local repository folder named `napari-docs`. Alternately, you could also
rename the repository when forking `napari/docs`.
````

- **If you wish to add/amend documentation that does not contain code, you will
  require a clean conda environment with napari docs dependencies installed.**

  Starting at the folder where you cloned the `napari/docs` repository, and
  after activating your clean `conda` environment, you can install these with
  `python -m pip install -r requirements.txt`.

  These dependencies will allow you to preview your document locally, as it
  would appear on `napari.org`, and they will also install `jupytext`, which you
  will need to contribute documents containing code or viewer interactions.

- **If you wish to add/amend documentation that does contain code, you will also
  require a clean conda environment with napari docs dependencies installed, but
  with a development installation of napari.**

  See the [contributor guide](dev-installation) for details. You should have
  [Jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/) installed. Familiarity with Jupyter
  notebooks (code cells and markdown cells) as well as using napari through a
  Jupyter notebook is recommended.

## 0. Before you start

If you'd like to contribute a brand new document to our usage section, it might
be worth [opening an issue](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=documentation&template=documentation.md&title=)
on our repository first to discuss the content you'd like to see and get some
early feedback from the community. The napari team can also suggest what type of
document would be best suited, and whether there are already existing documents
that could be expanded to include the content you think is lacking.

Go to your local `napari/docs` folder to find examples of documents you might
want to contribute. The paths are listed in parentheses below.

- [**Explanations**](../../guides/index) (in [`napari/docs/guides`](https://github.com/napari/docs/tree/main/docs/guides)):
  in depth content about napari architecture, development choices and some complex features
- [**Tutorials**](../../tutorials/index) (in [`napari/docs/tutorials`](https://github.com/napari/docs/tree/main/docs/tutorials)):
  detailed, reproducible step by step guides, usually combining multiple napari features to complete a potentially complex task
- [**How-tos**](../../howtos/index) (in [`napari/docs/howtos/`](https://github.com/napari/docs/tree/main/docs/howtos)):
  simple step by step guides demonstrating the use of common features
- [**Getting started**](../../tutorials/start_index) (in [`napari/docs/tutorials/fundamentals`](https://github.com/napari/docs/tree/main/docs/tutorials/fundamentals):
  these documents are a mix of tutorials and how-tos covering the fundamentals of installing and working with napari for beginners

The [**Examples gallery**](../../gallery) sources are in the [main `napari/napari` repository](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/examples)
and show code examples of how to use napari.

```{admonition} Got materials for a workshop?
:class: tip

If you already have teaching materials e.g. recordings, slide decks or Jupyter notebooks
hosted somewhere, you can add links to these on our [napari workshops](../../further-resources/napari-workshops.md) page.
```

## 1. Write your documentation

Our goal is that all tutorials and how-tos are easily downloadable and
executable by our users. This helps ensure that they are reproducible and makes
them easier to maintain. [Jupyter notebooks](https://jupyter.org/) are a great
option for our documents, because they allow you to easily combine code and well
formatted text in markdown and can be executed automatically. However, their
[raw JSON format](https://numpy.org/numpy-tutorials/content/pairing.html#background)
is not great for version control, so we use [MyST Markdown](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
documents in our repository and on [napari.org](https://napari.org).

If you are amending existing documentation, you can do so in your preferred text
editor. If you wish to add a new tutorial or a how-to, we recommend you use our
[template](./docs_template). Inside the template you'll find handy tips for
taking screenshots of the viewer, hiding code cells, using style guides and what
to include in the required prerequisites section.

To use the template, make a copy of `docs/developers/documentation/docs_template.md`
and rename it to match your content. You can edit the template directly in
Jupyter notebook, or in your preferred text editor.

```{admonition} Already have a notebook?
:class: tip

If you have an existing `.ipynb` Jupyter notebook that you'd like to contribute, you can convert it to MyST markdown
and then edit the `.md` file to prepare it for contributing.

Run `jupytext your-notebook.ipynb --to myst` to create a new MyST version of your file,
`your-notebook.md`. Edit this file to include the relevant sections from the docs template.
```

### Next steps

Depending on the type of contribution you are making, you may be able to skip
some steps:

* If you are adding new documentation and would prefer a simpler workflow,
  you can you can use the
  [GitHub web interface to open your pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/adding-a-file-to-a-repository).
  A member of the maintenance
  team will help with updating TOC and making sure your documentation has built
  correctly. You will also be able to preview the documentation yourself by
  downloading the built documentation via a link provided by a comment from the
  `github-actions` bot.
* If you are amending an existing document you can skip straight
  to [Step #3 - Preview your document](#3-preview-your-document)
* For all other documentation changes, follow the steps below.

## 2. Update TOC

If you are adding a new documentation file, you will need to add your document
to the correct folder based on its content (see the [list above](#0-before-you-start)
for common locations), and update `docs/_toc.yml`.

If you're adding a document
to an existing group, simply add a new `- file:` entry in the appropriate spot. For example, if I wanted to add
a `progress_bars.md` how to guide, I would place it in `docs/howtos` and update `_toc.yml` as below:

```yaml
- file: howtos/index
subtrees:
- titlesonly: True
entries:
- file: howtos/layers/index
subtrees:
- titlesonly: True
    entries:
    - file: howtos/layers/image
    - file: howtos/layers/labels
    - file: howtos/layers/points
    - file: howtos/layers/shapes
    - file: howtos/layers/surface
    - file: howtos/layers/tracks
    - file: howtos/layers/vectors
- file: howtos/connecting_events
- file: howtos/napari_imageJ
- file: howtos/docker
- file: howtos/perfmon
- file: howtos/progress_bars # added
```

To create a new subheading, you need a `subtrees` entry. For example, if I wanted to add `geo_tutorial1.md` and `geo_tutorial2.md`
to a new `geosciences` subheading in tutorials, I would place my documents in a new folder `docs/tutorials/geosciences`,
together with an `index.md` that describes what these tutorials would be about, and then update `_toc.yml` as below:

```yaml
- file: tutorials/index
subtrees:
- entries:
    - file: tutorials/annotation/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/annotation/annotate_points
    - file: tutorials/processing/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/processing/dask
    - file: tutorials/segmentation/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/segmentation/annotate_segmentation
    - file: tutorials/tracking/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/tracking/cell_tracking
    - file: tutorials/geosciences/index                 # added
    subtrees:                                           # added
    - entries:                                          # added
        - file: tutorials/geosciences/geo_tutorial1     # added
        - file: tutorials/geosciences/geo_tutorial2     # added
```

## 3. Preview your document

If your documentation change includes code, it is important that you ensure
the code is working and executable. This is why you will need to have a
development installation of napari installed. [Examples](gallery)
are automatically executed when the documentation is built and code problems can
also be caught when previewing the built documentation. If your documentation
change does not include code, you only need the napari docs dependencies
installed.

There are two ways you can preview the documentation website: by building
locally, or downloading the GitHub Actions built documentation when you submit
your pull request.

To build the documentation locally, run `make docs` from the root of your local
clone of the `napari/docs` repository (assuming you've installed the
[docs prerequisites](#prerequisites)).

```bash
make docs
```

````{note}
The `make docs` command above assumes your have a local clone of the
[`napari/napari`](https://github.com/napari/napari) repo at the same level as
the `napari/docs` clone. If that's not the case, you can specify the location of
the examples gallery folder by executing

```bash
make docs GALLERY_PATH=<path-to-examples-folder>
```

The `GALLERY_PATH` option must be given relative to the `docs` folder. If your
folder structure is 

```
├── napari-docs
│   └── docs
├── napari
│   ├── binder
│   ├── examples
│   ├── napari
│   ├── napari_builtins
│   ├── resources
│   └── tools
```

Then the command would be
```bash
make docs GALLERY_PATH=../../napari/examples
```

````

The rendered HTML will be placed in `docs/_build`. Find `index.html` in this
folder and drag it into a browser to preview the website with your new document.

Alternatively, when you submit your pull request, the napari docs repository
continuous integration includes a GitHub action that builds the documentation
and saves the artifact for you to download. This is another way to check that
your built documentation looks as you expect. To download the built
documentation, go to your PR, scroll down to the continuous integration tests,
then:

1. Click on **Details** next to `Build PR Docs / Build & Upload Artifact (pull_request)`:

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-1.png)

2. Click on **Summary** on the top left corner:

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-2.png)

3. Scroll down to **Artifacts** and click on **docs** to download the built documentation:

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-3.png)

## 4. Submit your pull request

Once you have written and previewed your document, it's time to open a pull request to [napari's docs repository](https://github.com/napari/docs) and contribute it to our codebase.

If you are simply contributing one file (e.g., a tutorial or how-to page) you
can use the [GitHub web interface to open your pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/adding-a-file-to-a-repository). Ensure you
document is added to the correct folder based on its content (see the
[list above](#0-before-you-start) for common locations).

To open a pull request via git and the command line, follow [this guide](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-create-a-pull-request-on-github).
You can also reach out to us on [zulip](https://napari.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/212875-general) for assistance!

Not sure where to place your document or update `_toc.yml`? Make a best guess and open the pull request - the napari team will
help you edit your document and find the right spot!

Commit message:

Improve documentation on building docs.
Also adds napari[dev] as a docs dependency, to allow building the docs without installing the napari development version first.

docs/developers/documentation/index.md, after:

(docs_contributing_guide)=
# Contributing Documentation

This guide will teach you how to submit new documents to napari's usage
documentation.

## Organization of the documentation

The napari documentation is built from sources located at the
[napari/docs](https://github.com/napari/docs) repository on GitHub. That
repository is where all the narrative documentation (e.g. tutorials, how-to
guides) pull requests should be made. Meanwhile, changes to docstrings or to the
[examples gallery](https://napari.org/gallery) should be made to the
[napari/napari](https://github.com/napari/napari) repository.

## Prerequisites

Prerequisites depend on the type of contribution you wish to make. In general,
you will require:

- Some familiarity with [`git`](https://git-scm.com);
- A [GitHub](https://github.com) account.

You should first [fork](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo)
and clone the [napari/docs](https://github.com/napari/docs) repo to your
machine, and navigate to the resulting folder:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:<your-username>/docs.git napari-docs
cd napari-docs/
```

````{note}
To reduce confusion and possible conflicts, the `docs` fork is being cloned into
a local repository folder named `napari-docs`. Alternately, you could also
rename the repository when forking `napari/docs`.
````

- **If you wish to add/amend documentation that does not contain code, you will
  require a clean conda environment with napari docs dependencies installed.**

  Starting at the folder where you cloned the `napari/docs` repository, and
  after activating your clean `conda` environment, you can install these with
  `python -m pip install -r requirements.txt`.

  These dependencies will allow you to preview your document locally, as it
  would appear on `napari.org`, and they will also install `jupytext`, which you
  will need to contribute documents containing code or viewer interactions.

  Note that this will install the latest *released* version of `napari` and its
  development dependencies. This may differ from the *development* version,
  which is the version in the `main` branch of the napari repository. To install
  the development version, follow the [contributor guide](dev-installation).

- **If you wish to add/amend documentation that does contain code, you will also
  require a clean conda environment with napari docs dependencies installed, but
  with a development installation of napari.**

  See the [contributor guide](dev-installation) for details. You should have
  [Jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/) installed. Familiarity with Jupyter
  notebooks (code cells and markdown cells) as well as using napari through a
  Jupyter notebook is recommended.

## 0. Before you start

If you'd like to contribute a brand new document to our usage section, it might
be worth [opening an issue](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=documentation&template=documentation.md&title=)
on our repository first to discuss the content you'd like to see and get some
early feedback from the community. The napari team can also suggest what type of
document would be best suited, and whether there are already existing documents
that could be expanded to include the content you think is lacking.

Go to your local `napari/docs` folder to find examples of documents you might
want to contribute. The paths are listed in parentheses below.

- [**Explanations**](../../guides/index) (in [`napari/docs/guides`](https://github.com/napari/docs/tree/main/docs/guides)):
  in depth content about napari architecture, development choices and some complex features
- [**Tutorials**](../../tutorials/index) (in [`napari/docs/tutorials`](https://github.com/napari/docs/tree/main/docs/tutorials)):
  detailed, reproducible step by step guides, usually combining multiple napari features to complete a potentially complex task
- [**How-tos**](../../howtos/index) (in [`napari/docs/howtos/`](https://github.com/napari/docs/tree/main/docs/howtos)):
  simple step by step guides demonstrating the use of common features
- [**Getting started**](../../tutorials/start_index) (in [`napari/docs/tutorials/fundamentals`](https://github.com/napari/docs/tree/main/docs/tutorials/fundamentals):
  these documents are a mix of tutorials and how-tos covering the fundamentals of installing and working with napari for beginners

The [**Examples gallery**](../../gallery) sources are in the [main `napari/napari` repository](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/examples)
and show code examples of how to use napari.

```{admonition} Got materials for a workshop?
:class: tip

If you already have teaching materials e.g. recordings, slide decks or Jupyter notebooks
hosted somewhere, you can add links to these on our [napari workshops](../../further-resources/napari-workshops.md) page.
```

## 1. Write your documentation

Our goal is that all tutorials and how-tos are easily downloadable and
executable by our users. This helps ensure that they are reproducible and makes
them easier to maintain. [Jupyter notebooks](https://jupyter.org/) are a great
option for our documents, because they allow you to easily combine code and well
formatted text in markdown and can be executed automatically. However, their
[raw JSON format](https://numpy.org/numpy-tutorials/content/pairing.html#background)
is not great for version control, so we use [MyST Markdown](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
documents in our repository and on [napari.org](https://napari.org).

If you are amending existing documentation, you can do so in your preferred text
editor. If you wish to add a new tutorial or a how-to, we recommend you use our
[template](./docs_template). Inside the template you'll find handy tips for
taking screenshots of the viewer, hiding code cells, using style guides and what
to include in the required prerequisites section.

To use the template, make a copy of `docs/developers/documentation/docs_template.md`
and rename it to match your content. You can edit the template directly in
Jupyter notebook, or in your preferred text editor.

```{admonition} Already have a notebook?
:class: tip

If you have an existing `.ipynb` Jupyter notebook that you'd like to contribute, you can convert it to MyST markdown
and then edit the `.md` file to prepare it for contributing.

Run `jupytext your-notebook.ipynb --to myst` to create a new MyST version of your file,
`your-notebook.md`. Edit this file to include the relevant sections from the docs template.
```

### Next steps

Depending on the type of contribution you are making, you may be able to skip
some steps:

* If you are adding new documentation and would prefer a simpler workflow,
  you can you can use the
  [GitHub web interface to open your pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/adding-a-file-to-a-repository).
  A member of the maintenance
  team will help with updating TOC and making sure your documentation has built
  correctly. You will also be able to preview the documentation yourself by
  downloading the built documentation via a link provided by a comment from the
  `github-actions` bot.
* If you are amending an existing document you can skip straight
  to [Step #3 - Preview your document](#3-preview-your-document)
* For all other documentation changes, follow the steps below.

## 2. Update TOC

If you are adding a new documentation file, you will need to add your document
to the correct folder based on its content (see the [list above](#0-before-you-start)
for common locations), and update `docs/_toc.yml`.

If you're adding a document
to an existing group, simply add a new `- file:` entry in the appropriate spot. For example, if I wanted to add
a `progress_bars.md` how to guide, I would place it in `docs/howtos` and update `_toc.yml` as below:

```yaml
- file: howtos/index
subtrees:
- titlesonly: True
entries:
- file: howtos/layers/index
subtrees:
- titlesonly: True
    entries:
    - file: howtos/layers/image
    - file: howtos/layers/labels
    - file: howtos/layers/points
    - file: howtos/layers/shapes
    - file: howtos/layers/surface
    - file: howtos/layers/tracks
    - file: howtos/layers/vectors
- file: howtos/connecting_events
- file: howtos/napari_imageJ
- file: howtos/docker
- file: howtos/perfmon
- file: howtos/progress_bars # added
```

To create a new subheading, you need a `subtrees` entry. For example, if I wanted to add `geo_tutorial1.md` and `geo_tutorial2.md`
to a new `geosciences` subheading in tutorials, I would place my documents in a new folder `docs/tutorials/geosciences`,
together with an `index.md` that describes what these tutorials would be about, and then update `_toc.yml` as below:

```yaml
- file: tutorials/index
subtrees:
- entries:
    - file: tutorials/annotation/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/annotation/annotate_points
    - file: tutorials/processing/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/processing/dask
    - file: tutorials/segmentation/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/segmentation/annotate_segmentation
    - file: tutorials/tracking/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/tracking/cell_tracking
    - file: tutorials/geosciences/index                 # added
    subtrees:                                           # added
    - entries:                                          # added
        - file: tutorials/geosciences/geo_tutorial1     # added
        - file: tutorials/geosciences/geo_tutorial2     # added
```

## 3. Preview your document

If your documentation change includes code, it is important that you ensure
the code is working and executable. This is why you will need to have a
development installation of napari installed. [Examples](gallery)
are automatically executed when the documentation is built and code problems can
also be caught when previewing the built documentation. If your documentation
change does not include code, you only need the napari docs dependencies
installed.

There are two ways you can preview the documentation website: by building
locally, or downloading the GitHub Actions built documentation when you submit
your pull request.

To build the documentation locally, run `make docs` from the root of your local
clone of the `napari/docs` repository (assuming you've installed the
[docs prerequisites](#prerequisites)).

```bash
make docs
```

````{note}
The `make docs` command above assumes your have a local clone of the
[`napari/napari`](https://github.com/napari/napari) repo at the same level as
the `napari/docs` clone. If that's not the case, you can specify the location of
the examples gallery folder by executing

```bash
make docs GALLERY_PATH=<path-to-examples-folder>
```

The `GALLERY_PATH` option must be given relative to the `docs` folder. If your
folder structure is 

```
├── napari-docs
│   └── docs
├── napari
│   ├── binder
│   ├── examples
│   ├── napari
│   ├── napari_builtins
│   ├── resources
│   └── tools
```

Then the command would be
```bash
make docs GALLERY_PATH=../../napari/examples
```

````

The rendered HTML will be placed in `docs/_build`. Find `index.html` in this
folder and drag it into a browser to preview the website with your new document.

Alternatively, when you submit your pull request, the napari docs repository
continuous integration includes a GitHub action that builds the documentation
and saves the artifact for you to download. This is another way to check that
your built documentation looks as you expect. To download the built
documentation, go to your PR, scroll down to the continuous integration tests,
then:

1. Click on **Details** next to `Build PR Docs / Build & Upload Artifact (pull_request)`:

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-1.png)

2. Click on **Summary** on the top left corner:

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-2.png)

3. Scroll down to **Artifacts** and click on **docs** to download the built documentation:

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-3.png)

## 4. Submit your pull request

Once you have written and previewed your document, it's time to open a pull request to [napari's docs repository](https://github.com/napari/docs) and contribute it to our codebase.

If you are simply contributing one file (e.g., a tutorial or how-to page) you
can use the [GitHub web interface to open your pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/adding-a-file-to-a-repository). Ensure you
document is added to the correct folder based on its content (see the
[list above](#0-before-you-start) for common locations).

To open a pull request via git and the command line, follow [this guide](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-create-a-pull-request-on-github).
You can also reach out to us on [zulip](https://napari.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/212875-general) for assistance!

Not sure where to place your document or update `_toc.yml`? Make a best guess and open the pull request - the napari team will
help you edit your document and find the right spot!
