docs/roadmaps/index.md, before:

(roadmaps)=

# Roadmaps

The [**napari global roadmap**](https://github.com/orgs/napari/projects/24/views/2?pane=info) is hosted on a Github Project board. This roadmap captures the current priorities of the napari core developer team. It is revisited every six months.

## For contributors

If a particular roadmap item is important to you and you want to help make it happen sooner, please [chat with us](https://napari.zulipchat.com/)! You can help by [contributing code or documentation](https://napari.org/dev/developers/index.html)

## For funders

If you have the resources and you are interested in bringing one or more of our roadmap items to life, you can write to us at [napari-steering-council@googlegroups.com](mailto:napari-steering-council@googlegroups.com) and donate on our [NumFOCUS page](https://numfocus.org/donate-to-napari). For a limited time, CZI will kindly [match donations up to a total of $100,000 USD](https://chanzuckerberg.com/science/programs-resources/imaging/napari/seeding-sustainability-for-the-napari-project/).

### Past Roadmaps

- [](0_4.md)
- [](0_3_retrospective.md)
- [](0_3.md)

Commit message:

Add active roadmap document (#735)
# References and relevant issues
<!-- What relevant resources were used in the creation of this PR?
If this PR addresses an existing issue on the repo,
please link to that issue here as "Closes #(issue-number)".
If this PR adds docs for a napari PR please add a "Depends on <napari PR
link>" -->

# Description
This PR adds our active roadmap to the website under the `Roadmaps`
section and links to it from the `Roadmaps` index page.

<!-- Previewing the Documentation Build
When you submit this PR, jobs that preview the documentation will be
kicked off.
By default, they will use the `slimfast` build (`make` target), which is
fast, because
it doesn't build any content from outside the `docs` repository and
doesn't run notebook cells.
You can trigger other builds by commenting on the PR with:

@napari-bot make <target>

where <target> can be:
html : a full build, just like the deployment to napari.org
html-noplot : a full build, but without the gallery examples from
`napari/napari`
docs : only the content from `napari/docs`, with notebook code cells
executed
slimfast : the default, only the content from `napari/docs`, without
code cell execution
slimgallery : `slimfast`, but with the gallery examples from
`napari/napari` built
-->

<!-- Final Checklist
- If images included: I have added [alt
text](https://webaim.org/techniques/alttext/)
If workflow, documentation build or deployment change:
- My PR is the minimum possible work for the desired functionality
- I have commented my code, to let others know what it does
-->

---------

Co-authored-by: Draga Doncila <ddon0001@student.monash.edu>

docs/roadmaps/index.md, after:

(roadmaps)=

# Roadmaps

The [**napari global roadmap**](active_roadmap.md) is a living document, and we revisit it every three months. It contains a summary of our vision, our mission and values, and our key focus areas
for the project. It also details strategic deliverables and key priorities for each focus area within a horizon of 3-5 years.

## For contributors

If a particular roadmap item is important to you and you want to help make it happen sooner, please [chat with us](https://napari.zulipchat.com/)! You can help by [contributing code or documentation](https://napari.org/dev/developers/index.html)

## For funders

If you have the resources and you are interested in bringing one or more of our roadmap items to life, you can write to us at [napari-steering-council@googlegroups.com](mailto:napari-steering-council@googlegroups.com) and donate on our [NumFOCUS page](https://numfocus.org/donate-to-napari). For a limited time, CZI will kindly [match donations up to a total of $100,000 USD](https://chanzuckerberg.com/science/programs-resources/imaging/napari/seeding-sustainability-for-the-napari-project/).

### Past Roadmaps

- [](0_4.md)
- [](0_3_retrospective.md)
- [](0_3.md)
