docs/developers/index.md, before:

(contributing-index)=
# Contributing

We welcome your contributions! Here you will find resources to help you contribute
to napari.

napari has a [Code of Conduct](napari-coc) that should be honored by everyone who participates in the `napari` community.

- [](contact): how to contact us.
- [](roadmaps): convey the general direction for napari development and possible
  work plans.
- **Contributor guides**: resources on for contributors:
  - [Contributing guide](napari-contributing)
    - [Development installation](dev-installation)
    - [Testing](napari-testing)
    - [Translations](napari-translations)
    - [Performance](performance)
      - [Profiling](napari-profiling)
      - [Benchmarks](napari-benchmarks)
    - [Contributing documentation](contributing-docs)
  - [](architecture-index)

- **Core developer guides**: resources for core developers, including information for
  onboarding new core developers:
  - [Core Developer guide](core-dev-guide)
  - [Maintenance](napari-maintenance)
  - [Release guide](napari-release)
  - [Deploying documentation](docs-deployment)
  - [Packaging](napari-packaging)

(contact)=

## Contact

There are a number of ways to contact the napari community:

- [zulip](https://napari.zulipchat.com/): the zulip napari community chat channel.
- [GitHub issue](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues): feel free to open an
  issue in our GitHub repository. Issues and pull-requests are written in [Markdown](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/about-writing-and-formatting-on-github). You can find a comprehensive guide [here](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax)
- [Image.sc forum](https://forum.image.sc/tag/napari): napari is a community partner
  on the Image.sc forum. All usage support requests should be posted on the forum with
  the tag "napari".

Commit message:

Move links out of navbar and into sidebar / other docs. (#620)
# References and relevant issues

Closes #615. Follow up of #610. Remake of #617 because I got confused
with the commit history and merging

# Description

I think the navbar is a bit too cluttered due to the 'More' section
being propagated to the sidebar in smaller width screens (and generally
being finnicky)

1. Moves 3 lower-value (I still love them) links out of the navbar:
blog, zulip chat, and workshop template
2. Moves blog to homepage sidebar (confirms there is a link to blog in
community)
3. Moves workshop template link to Workshops page in Usage, also adds a
link to Contributing index
4. Removes zulip link in favor of presence in homepage sidebar and
presence in footer. If we want to keep this in header we should move the
footer link up to the header in theme
5. Adds troubleshooting link to homepage sidebar (**check** that this is
internally referenced correctly, I can't do
https://napari.org/troubleshooting.html/ like I can for other internal
refs, it 404s)

docs/developers/index.md, after:

(contributing-index)=
# Contributing

We welcome your contributions! Here you will find resources to help you contribute
to napari.

napari has a [Code of Conduct](napari-coc) that should be honored by everyone who participates in the `napari` community.

- [](contact): how to contact us.
- [](roadmaps): convey the general direction for napari development and possible work plans
- [napari Workshop](https://napari.org/napari-workshop-template/home.html): create and deploy your own napari workshop materials

- **Contributor guides**: resources for contributors:
  - [Contributing guide](napari-contributing)
    - [Development installation](dev-installation)
    - [Testing](napari-testing)
    - [Translations](napari-translations)
    - [Performance](performance)
      - [Profiling](napari-profiling)
      - [Benchmarks](napari-benchmarks)
    - [Contributing documentation](contributing-docs)
  - [](architecture-index)

- **Core developer guides**: resources for core developers, including information for
  onboarding new core developers:
  - [Core Developer guide](core-dev-guide)
  - [Maintenance](napari-maintenance)
  - [Release guide](napari-release)
  - [Deploying documentation](docs-deployment)
  - [Packaging](napari-packaging)

(contact)=

## Contact

There are a number of ways to contact the napari community:

- [zulip](https://napari.zulipchat.com/): the zulip napari community chat channel.
- [GitHub issue](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues): feel free to open an
  issue in our GitHub repository. Issues and pull-requests are written in [Markdown](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/about-writing-and-formatting-on-github). You can find a comprehensive guide [here](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax)
- [Image.sc forum](https://forum.image.sc/tag/napari): napari is a community partner
  on the Image.sc forum. All usage support requests should be posted on the forum with
  the tag "napari".
