docs/plugins/virtual_environment_docs/2-deploying-your-plugin.md, before:

# Deploying your plugin

This guide explains some of the techniques you can use to deploy your plugin.

## This guide covers:

- [Overview of PyPI and Anaconda](#overview-of-pypi-and-anaconda)
- [Building your package](#building-your-package)
- [Deploying plugins to PyPI](#deploying-plugins-to-pypi)
  - [Manually via twine](#manually-via-twine)
  - [Automatically via GitHub actions](#automatically-via-github-actions)
- [Deploying to Anaconda](#deploying-to-anaconda)

## Overview of PyPI and Anaconda
PyPI and Anaconda are two options for how you distribute your package and allow your users to more easily find and install it.  Try to deploy to both! But for now, try to at least use PyPI. You can always also provide your users with manual installation instructions (e.g. if you want them to use `conda` or have specific dependencies).

### Building your package
`sdist` means source distribution. An `sdist` includes all of the files that are required to *build* your package. An `sdist` may require specific additional software (e.g. compilers) to actually build.

`wheel` is a prebuilt package, ready to drop into your `site-packages` directory. It includes compiled OS-specific extensions (if applicable).

You are *strongly* encouraged to ship both! If the `wheel` is not present, `pip` will try to build it from the `sdist` before installation, and that may fail depending on the package. To see if a given package ships a `wheel`, check here: https://pypi.org/project/napari/#files

**Note:** This goes for dependencies too! Check all your dependencies for wheel availability.

**[build](https://pypa-build.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ )** is the recommended package builder that bundles your source code into `sdist` or `wheel` distributions. Install `build` into your local environment and then run it at the root of your package to build your package, as shown below:

```console
   pip install build
   python -m build .
```

## Deploying plugins to PyPI

### Manually via **twine**.
[twine](https://twine.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ ) is a command line client you can use to upload your distribution to PyPI. Note that you will need to set up a PyPI account and authenticate yourself when uploading. See [this great guide](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/) for a detailed tutorial to building and sharing your first Python packages.

```console

    # twine is a PyPI Client
    # build is a PEP 517 package builder
    $ pip install twine build

    # create a wheel and an sdist
    $ python -m build

    # (Optional) upload to test PyPI
    $ twine upload -r testpypi dist/*

    # Upload to PyPI
    $ twine upload dist/*

```
**Note:** `python -m build` is the modern alternative to `setuptools`' `python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel`. It calls `setuptools` behind the scenes.

### Automatically via GitHub actions
This requires either:
* Running `twine` as above in a workflow after setting up Python and installing it
or
* Using a pre-made [GitHub action](https://github.com/pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish)

Here is an example workflow that manually deploys using `twine` when tests pass and you push a tagged commit.

```yaml
#your-repo/.github/workflows/deploy.yaml
jobs:
    deploy:
      name: Deploy
      runs on: ubuntu-latest
      if: “success() && startsWith(github.ref, ‘refs/tags/’)”
      steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v2

    -     name: Set up Python
           uses: actions/setup-python@v2
     -     with:
           python-version “3.x”

     -     name: install
           run:
               pip install -U pip
               pip install -U build twine
               python -m build

    -     name: Build and publish
          run:  twine upload dist/*
          env:
             TWINE_USERNAME: __token__
             TWINE_PASSWORD: ${{ secrets.TWINE_API_KEY }}

```

  **Note:** Gate this action on some criterion, e.g. a git tag as above, or [some other criterion](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/writing-workflows/choosing-when-your-workflow-runs/events-that-trigger-workflows).

(deploying-to-anaconda)=
## Deploying to Anaconda
This is only a brief guide to deploying to `conda-forge`. More information can be found in the [conda-forge docs](https://conda-forge.org/docs/maintainer/adding_pkgs.html).

1. Fork https://github.com/conda-forge/staged-recipes
2. Create a new branch
3. Create a new folder in recipes directory (copy the existing example)
4. Update the **meta.yaml** file to include your package's build and run requirements
5. Commit and open a PR to https://github.com/conda-forge/staged-recipes

Once your recipe is approved and merged, the rest happens *automagically*, and your package will appear on the anaconda cloud.

This is **far** easier if you already have an `sdist` published to PyPI.

## Other topics in this series:
* [Virtual environments](./1-virtual-environments.md)
* [Version management](./3-version-management.md)
* [Developer tools](./4-developer-tools.md)
* [Survey/Q&A](./5-survey.md)

The next topic in this series is [Version management](./3-version-management.md).

Commit message:

Update finding and installing plugin docs (#541)
# References and relevant issues
Closes #122
Closes #354
Closes #532 
Closes #508

# Description
- Update screenshots and text to reflect current state of napari plugin
manager (also adds links to their docs)
- Update instructions on deploying your plugin to conda-forge

---------

Co-authored-by: Carol Willing <carolcode@willingconsulting.com>
Co-authored-by: Tim Monko <timmonko@gmail.com>

docs/plugins/virtual_environment_docs/2-deploying-your-plugin.md, after:

# Deploying your plugin

This guide explains some of the techniques you can use to deploy your plugin.

## Overview of PyPI and conda
PyPI and conda are two options for how you distribute your package and allow your users to more easily find and install it.  Ideally, try to deploy to both. But for now, try to at least use PyPI. You can always also provide your users with manual installation instructions (e.g. if you want them to use `conda` or have specific dependencies).

### Building your package
`sdist` means source distribution. An `sdist` includes all of the files that are required to *build* your package. An `sdist` may require specific additional software (e.g. compilers) to actually build.

`wheel` is a prebuilt package, ready to drop into your `site-packages` directory. It includes compiled OS-specific extensions (if applicable).

You are *strongly* encouraged to ship both! If the `wheel` is not present, `pip` will try to build it from the `sdist` before installation, and that may fail depending on the package. To see if a given package ships a `wheel`, check here: https://pypi.org/project/napari/#files

**Note:** This goes for dependencies too! Check all your dependencies for wheel availability.

**[build](https://pypa-build.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ )** is the recommended package builder that bundles your source code into `sdist` or `wheel` distributions. Install `build` into your local environment and then run it at the root of your package to build your package, as shown below:

```console
   pip install build
   python -m build .
```

## Deploying plugins to PyPI

### Manually via **twine**.
[twine](https://twine.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ ) is a command line client you can use to upload your distribution to PyPI. Note that you will need to set up a PyPI account and authenticate yourself when uploading. See [this great guide](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/) for a detailed tutorial to building and sharing your first Python packages.

```console

    # twine is a PyPI Client
    # build is a PEP 517 package builder
    $ pip install twine build

    # create a wheel and an sdist
    $ python -m build

    # (Optional) upload to test PyPI
    $ twine upload -r testpypi dist/*

    # Upload to PyPI
    $ twine upload dist/*

```
**Note:** `python -m build` is the modern alternative to `setuptools`' `python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel`. It calls `setuptools` behind the scenes.

### Automatically via GitHub actions
This requires either:
* Running `twine` as above in a workflow after setting up Python and installing it
or
* Using a pre-made [GitHub action](https://github.com/pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish)

Here is an example workflow that manually deploys using `twine` when tests pass and you push a tagged commit.

```yaml
#your-repo/.github/workflows/deploy.yaml
jobs:
    deploy:
      name: Deploy
      runs on: ubuntu-latest
      if: “success() && startsWith(github.ref, ‘refs/tags/’)”
      steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v2

    -     name: Set up Python
           uses: actions/setup-python@v2
     -     with:
           python-version “3.x”

     -     name: install
           run:
               pip install -U pip
               pip install -U build twine
               python -m build

    -     name: Build and publish
          run:  twine upload dist/*
          env:
             TWINE_USERNAME: __token__
             TWINE_PASSWORD: ${{ secrets.TWINE_API_KEY }}

```

  **Note:** Gate this action on some criterion, e.g. a git tag as above, or [some other criterion](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/writing-workflows/choosing-when-your-workflow-runs/events-that-trigger-workflows).

(deploying-to-conda-forge)=
## Deploying to conda-forge
This is only a brief guide to deploying to `conda-forge`. More information can be found in the [conda-forge docs](https://conda-forge.org/docs/maintainer/adding_pkgs.html).
To deploy a plugin to `conda-forge`, the plugin's build and run requirements **must** be available on `conda-forge` so the plugin and its dependencies may be installed.
1. Fork https://github.com/conda-forge/staged-recipes
2. Create a new branch
3. Create a new folder in recipes directory (copy the existing example)
4. Update the **meta.yaml** file to include your package's build and run requirements
5. Commit and open a PR to https://github.com/conda-forge/staged-recipes

Once your recipe is approved and merged, the rest happens *automagically*, and your package will appear on the [conda-forge package list](https://conda-forge.org/packages/).

This is **far** easier if you already have an `sdist` published to PyPI.

```{admonition} Updating your package on conda-forge
:class: important

By default, when a new release is detected on PyPI, conda-forge bots will automatically make a pull requests to your `conda-forge/package-name-feedstock`, and the plugin maintainer must review, make changes, if needed,  and approve the pull request.
```

## Other topics in this series:
* [Virtual environments](./1-virtual-environments.md)
* [Version management](./3-version-management.md)
* [Developer tools](./4-developer-tools.md)
* [Survey/Q&A](./5-survey.md)

The next topic in this series is [Version management](./3-version-management.md).
