docs/howtos/layers/tracks.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.10.3
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

(layers-tracks)=
# Using the `tracks` layer

In this document, you will learn about the `napari` `tracks` layer, including
displaying tracks and defining relationships between tracks.

For more information about layers, refer to [Layers at a glance](../../guides/layers).

```{note}
Tracks layers can be created only programmatically, i.e. in the console, using a
script, etc. Please refer to [A simple example](#a-simple-example) and use the
code there to add a tracks layer first, then explore the GUI controls.
```

## When to use the `tracks` layer

The `tracks` layer allows you to display trajectories in `nD+t` while
visualizing the recent history of the track via a fading tail.

Each track can have annotations associated with it using the `Tracks.features`
table. These features can be used to set the colors of the tracks.

For example, when displaying tracks of different classes/types, one could
automatically set the color of the individual tracks by their respective
class/type.

## A simple example

You can create a new viewer and add a set of tracks in one go using {func}`napari.view_tracks`,
or if you already have an existing viewer, you can add tracks to it using {meth}`viewer.add_tracks<napari.Viewer.add_tracks>`.
The API of both methods is the same.

In this example, we will overlay some tracks on an image from the Hubble space
telescope:

```python
import napari
from skimage import data

hubble_image = data.hubble_deep_field()

tracks_data = [
    [1, 0, 236, 0],
    [1, 1, 236, 100],
    [1, 2, 236, 200],
    [1, 3, 236, 500],
    [1, 4, 236, 1000],
    [2, 0, 436, 0],
    [2, 1, 436, 100],
    [2, 2, 436, 200],
    [2, 3, 436, 500],
    [2, 4, 436, 1000],
    [3, 0, 636, 0],
    [3, 1, 636, 100],
    [3, 2, 636, 200],
    [3, 3, 636, 500],
    [3, 4, 636, 1000]
]

viewer = napari.view_image(hubble_image, name='image')
viewer.add_tracks(tracks_data, name='tracks')

napari.run()
```

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_simple_demo.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_simple_demo.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/tracks_simple_demo.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="Tracks simple demo."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

## GUI controls for the `tracks` layer

* **Buttons**
  * Pan/zoom - ![image: Pan/zoom tool](../../_static/images/pan-zoom-tool.png) is the default
    mode of the layer and supports panning and zooming. Press the `1` key when the
    layer is selected to use this mode.
  * Transform - ![image: Transform](../../_static/images/transform-tool.png) enables you to
    rotate, scale, or translate the layer. Note: at present this feature is limited to 2D viewer display mode. To reset the transformation, you can
    Option/Alt-click the transform button (a confirmation dialog will open to
    confirm the reset). Press the `2` key when the layer is selected to use this mode.
* **Controls**
  * Color by - there is a dropdown for this but at present the only choice is
    `track_id`.
  * Colormap - choose a colormap from the dropdown. These are explained in
    [the colormaps section](./surface.md#working-with-colormaps) of
    _Using the surface layer_.
  * Blending - choose `opaque`, `translucent`, `translucent no depth`, `minimum`
    or `additive` from the dropdown. Refer to the
    [Blending layers](blending-layers) section of _Layers at a glance_ for an
    explanation of each type of blending.
  * Opacity - click and hold the circle on the opacity slider bar and adjust it to
    any value between 0.00 (clear) and 1.00 (completely opaque).
  * Tail width - adjusting the tail width gives the track the appearance of being
    narrower or wider. At the minimum value, the track looks like a one-pixel
    line.
  * Tail length - adjusting the tail length gives the track the appearance of
    being shorter or longer. At the minimum value, it looks something like a
    dotted line, at the maximum value it almost looks like an unbroken line.
  * Head length - Adjusting the head length gives the track the appearance of
    being longer. If it is adjusted to the maximum value, the tracks look like
    stripes. At the minimum value, the tracks flash across the canvas and
    disappear before starting again.
  * Tail - check this box to see the tracks. If it is not checked, you will not be
    able to see the tracks at all.
  * Show ID - check this box to display a previously assigned `track_id` label for
    each track. Assigning values to `track_id` is explained in
    [Tracks data](#tracks-data) below.
  * Graph - check this box to display a previously created graph.

## Tracks data

The input data to the tracks layer must be an `NxD+1` NumPy array or list
containing the coordinates of `N` vertices with a track ID and coordinate in `D`
dimensions. The ordering of these dimensions is the same as the ordering of the
dimensions for image layers. This array is always accessible through the
`layer.data` property and will grow or shrink as new tracks are either added or
deleted.

Consider the set of 4D tracks data (time + 3 spatial dimensions) defined below.
The `Tracks` layer assumes the first column is the `track_id`, the second column
is the time axis, and columns 3-5 are Z, Y, and X, respectively. Each row is one
vertex in a track. All vertices with the same `track_id` are joined into a
single track. In this case, we have defined 2 tracks: track 0, which goes from
`[10, 10, 10]` to `[20, 10, 10]` and track 1, which goes from `[10, 8, 5]` to
`[7, 8, 10]` (coordinates written as `[x, y, z]`).

| track_id | t | z  | y  | x  |
|----------|---|----|----|----|
| 0        | 0 | 10 | 10 | 10 |
| 0        | 1 | 10 | 10 | 20 |
| 1        | 0 | 5  | 8  | 10 |
| 1        | 1 | 10 | 8  | 7  |

The data in the array must be sorted by increasing `track_id` then time, as
shown above.  We can pass the example data above to the tracks layer as follows:

```python

tracks_data = [
    [0, 0, 10, 10, 10],
    [0, 1, 10, 10, 20],
    [1, 0, 5, 8, 10],
    [1, 1, 10, 8, 7]
]

viewer = napari.view_tracks(tracks_data)
napari.run()
```

## Tracks graph

We can use the tracks `graph` argument to define the relationships between
tracks (e.g., tracks merging or tracks splitting). The graph is defined as a
dictionary where the keys are the `track_id` and the values are the `track_id`
of the parents of the the key.

For example, if we have a track 0, which splits into tracks 1 and 2 (i.e., track
0 is the parent of tracks 1 and 2), we would define the graph as:

```python
graph = {
    1: [0],
    2: [0]
}
```
If later tracks 1 and 2 merge into track 3 (i.e,. tracks 1 and 2 are the parent
of track 3), the dictionary would become

```python
graph = {
    1: [0],
    2: [0],
    3: [1, 2]
}
```
For a full example of 3d+t tracks data with a parent graph, please see
[](../../gallery/tracks_3d_with_graph).

## Using the `tracks` features table

The `Tracks` layer can contain features that annotate the vertices of each
track. `Tracks.features` stores the features in a table where each column
is the name of the feature and the values are rows with a value for
each vertex in the track (i.e., length `N` for `N` vertices in `Tracks.data`).
As we will see below, we can use the feature values to set the display
properties of the tracks (e.g., the track color).

## 3D rendering

All layers can be rendered in both 2D and 3D. One of the viewer buttons at the
bottom of the left panel can toggle between these 2 modes.
When in 2D, the button looks like this: ![image: 2D/3D button](../../_static/images/3D-button.png), ready to switch to 3D mode.
When in 3D, the button looks like this: ![image: 2D/3D button](../../_static/images/2D-button.png), ready to switch to 2D mode.

The number of dimensions sliders will be 2 or 3 less than the total number of
dimensions of the layer, allowing you to browse volumetric timeseries data and
other high dimensional data.

## Changing track width

We can specify the width of the tracks in pixels. The track width can be
specified via the `tail_width` keyword argument in the {meth}`viewer.add_tracks<napari.Viewer.add_tracks>` and
`napari.view_tracks()` methods. From a layer that has already been constructed,
we can set the track width via the `layer.tail_width` property.

```python
# create a tracks layer with a tail width of 5 pixels
viewer = napari.view_tracks(data, tail_width=5, name="my_tracks")

# update the tail width to 3 pixels
viewer.layers["my_tracks"].tail_width = 3
```

Additionally, we can adjust the width of the track in the GUI using the
"tail width" slider in the `tracks` layer controls.

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_width.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_width.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_width.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="Changing tracks width using the tail width slider."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

## Changing tail length

We can specify the length of the tails of the tracks in time units. The tail is
the portion of the track displayed from previous time steps. The track tail
length can be specified via the `tail_length` keyword argument in the
{meth}`viewer.add_tracks<napari.Viewer.add_tracks>` and `napari.view_tracks()` methods. From a layer that has
already been constructed, we can set the track width via the `tail_length`
property.

```python
# create a tracks layer with a tail length of 5 time units
viewer = napari.view_tracks(data, tail_length=5, name="my_tracks")

# update the tail width to 3 pixels
viewer.layers["my_tracks"].tail_length = 3

```

Additionally, we can adjust the width of the track in the GUI using the "tail
length" slider in the `tracks` layer controls.

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_length.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_length.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_length.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="Changing tracks length using the tail width slider."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

## Setting the track color with features

We can color the tracks by mapping colors to the track features defined in
`Tracks.features`. If we define features and pass them via the `features`
keyword argument in the {meth}`viewer.add_tracks<napari.Viewer.add_tracks>` and `napari.view_tracks()`
methods, we can then select the feature we would like to color the tracks by in
the "color by" dropdown menu in the `tracks` layer controls. We can additionally
specify the colormap used to map the feature value to color via the "colormap"
dropdown menu.

```python
import napari
import numpy as np
from skimage import data

hubble_image = data.hubble_deep_field()

tracks_data = np.asarray([
    [1, 0, 236, 0],
    [1, 1, 236, 100],
    [1, 2, 236, 200],
    [1, 3, 236, 500],
    [1, 4, 236, 1000],
    [2, 0, 436, 0],
    [2, 1, 436, 100],
    [2, 2, 436, 200],
    [2, 3, 436, 500],
    [2, 4, 436, 1000],
    [3, 0, 636, 0],
    [3, 1, 636, 100],
    [3, 2, 636, 200],
    [3, 3, 636, 500],
    [3, 4, 636, 1000]
])
track_confidence = np.array(5*[0.9] + 5*[0.3] + 5 * [0.1])
features = {
    'time': tracks_data[:, 1],
    'confidence': track_confidence
}

viewer = napari.view_image(hubble_image)
viewer.add_tracks(tracks_data, features=features)
napari.run()
```

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_color_by.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_color_by.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/tracks_color_by.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="Selecting tracks by the time feature and changing the color."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

## Putting it all together

Here you can see an example of 3D+t tracks. You can view the source code for
this example in [](../../gallery/tracks_3d)

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_3d_t.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_3d_t.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/tracks_3d_t.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="3D rendering of tracks."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

Commit message:

Remove deprecated `view_*` methods from docs materials (#864)
# References and relevant issues

Part of napari/napari#7047
Needed for napari/napari#8337

# Description

Replaces all uses of `napari.view_*` in the docs. Generally sticks to
`napari.imshow()` when there is an image, otherwise uses the
`napari.Viewer()` pattern.

docs/howtos/layers/tracks.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.10.3
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

(layers-tracks)=
# Using the `tracks` layer

In this document, you will learn about the `napari` `tracks` layer, including
displaying tracks and defining relationships between tracks.

For more information about layers, refer to [Layers at a glance](../../guides/layers).

```{note}
Tracks layers can be created only programmatically, i.e. in the console, using a
script, etc. Please refer to [A simple example](#a-simple-example) and use the
code there to add a tracks layer first, then explore the GUI controls.
```

## When to use the `tracks` layer

The `tracks` layer allows you to display trajectories in `nD+t` while
visualizing the recent history of the track via a fading tail.

Each track can have annotations associated with it using the `Tracks.features`
table. These features can be used to set the colors of the tracks.

For example, when displaying tracks of different classes/types, one could
automatically set the color of the individual tracks by their respective
class/type.

## A simple example

You can create a new viewer with `napari.Viewer()` and add a set of tracks using using {meth}`viewer.add_tracks<napari.Viewer.add_tracks>`.

In this example, we will overlay some tracks on an image from the Hubble space
telescope:

```python
import napari
from skimage import data

hubble_image = data.hubble_deep_field()

tracks_data = [
    [1, 0, 236, 0],
    [1, 1, 236, 100],
    [1, 2, 236, 200],
    [1, 3, 236, 500],
    [1, 4, 236, 1000],
    [2, 0, 436, 0],
    [2, 1, 436, 100],
    [2, 2, 436, 200],
    [2, 3, 436, 500],
    [2, 4, 436, 1000],
    [3, 0, 636, 0],
    [3, 1, 636, 100],
    [3, 2, 636, 200],
    [3, 3, 636, 500],
    [3, 4, 636, 1000]
]

viewer, _ = napari.imshow(hubble_image, name='image')
viewer.add_tracks(tracks_data, name='tracks')

napari.run()
```

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_simple_demo.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_simple_demo.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/tracks_simple_demo.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="Tracks simple demo."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

## GUI controls for the `tracks` layer

* **Buttons**
  * Pan/zoom - ![image: Pan/zoom tool](../../_static/images/pan-zoom-tool.png) is the default
    mode of the layer and supports panning and zooming. Press the `1` key when the
    layer is selected to use this mode.
  * Transform - ![image: Transform](../../_static/images/transform-tool.png) enables you to
    rotate, scale, or translate the layer. Note: at present this feature is limited to 2D viewer display mode. To reset the transformation, you can
    Option/Alt-click the transform button (a confirmation dialog will open to
    confirm the reset). Press the `2` key when the layer is selected to use this mode.
* **Controls**
  * Color by - there is a dropdown for this but at present the only choice is
    `track_id`.
  * Colormap - choose a colormap from the dropdown. These are explained in
    [the colormaps section](./surface.md#working-with-colormaps) of
    _Using the surface layer_.
  * Blending - choose `opaque`, `translucent`, `translucent no depth`, `minimum`
    or `additive` from the dropdown. Refer to the
    [Blending layers](blending-layers) section of _Layers at a glance_ for an
    explanation of each type of blending.
  * Opacity - click and hold the circle on the opacity slider bar and adjust it to
    any value between 0.00 (clear) and 1.00 (completely opaque).
  * Tail width - adjusting the tail width gives the track the appearance of being
    narrower or wider. At the minimum value, the track looks like a one-pixel
    line.
  * Tail length - adjusting the tail length gives the track the appearance of
    being shorter or longer. At the minimum value, it looks something like a
    dotted line, at the maximum value it almost looks like an unbroken line.
  * Head length - Adjusting the head length gives the track the appearance of
    being longer. If it is adjusted to the maximum value, the tracks look like
    stripes. At the minimum value, the tracks flash across the canvas and
    disappear before starting again.
  * Tail - check this box to see the tracks. If it is not checked, you will not be
    able to see the tracks at all.
  * Show ID - check this box to display a previously assigned `track_id` label for
    each track. Assigning values to `track_id` is explained in
    [Tracks data](#tracks-data) below.
  * Graph - check this box to display a previously created graph.

## Tracks data

The input data to the tracks layer must be an `NxD+1` NumPy array or list
containing the coordinates of `N` vertices with a track ID and coordinate in `D`
dimensions. The ordering of these dimensions is the same as the ordering of the
dimensions for image layers. This array is always accessible through the
`layer.data` property and will grow or shrink as new tracks are either added or
deleted.

Consider the set of 4D tracks data (time + 3 spatial dimensions) defined below.
The `Tracks` layer assumes the first column is the `track_id`, the second column
is the time axis, and columns 3-5 are Z, Y, and X, respectively. Each row is one
vertex in a track. All vertices with the same `track_id` are joined into a
single track. In this case, we have defined 2 tracks: track 0, which goes from
`[10, 10, 10]` to `[20, 10, 10]` and track 1, which goes from `[10, 8, 5]` to
`[7, 8, 10]` (coordinates written as `[x, y, z]`).

| track_id | t | z  | y  | x  |
|----------|---|----|----|----|
| 0        | 0 | 10 | 10 | 10 |
| 0        | 1 | 10 | 10 | 20 |
| 1        | 0 | 5  | 8  | 10 |
| 1        | 1 | 10 | 8  | 7  |

The data in the array must be sorted by increasing `track_id` then time, as
shown above.  We can pass the example data above to the tracks layer as follows:

```python

tracks_data = [
    [0, 0, 10, 10, 10],
    [0, 1, 10, 10, 20],
    [1, 0, 5, 8, 10],
    [1, 1, 10, 8, 7]
]

viewer = napari.Viewer()
viewer.add_tracks(tracks_data)
napari.run()
```

## Tracks graph

We can use the tracks `graph` argument to define the relationships between
tracks (e.g., tracks merging or tracks splitting). The graph is defined as a
dictionary where the keys are the `track_id` and the values are the `track_id`
of the parents of the the key.

For example, if we have a track 0, which splits into tracks 1 and 2 (i.e., track
0 is the parent of tracks 1 and 2), we would define the graph as:

```python
graph = {
    1: [0],
    2: [0]
}
```
If later tracks 1 and 2 merge into track 3 (i.e,. tracks 1 and 2 are the parent
of track 3), the dictionary would become

```python
graph = {
    1: [0],
    2: [0],
    3: [1, 2]
}
```
For a full example of 3d+t tracks data with a parent graph, please see
[](../../gallery/tracks_3d_with_graph).

## Using the `tracks` features table

The `Tracks` layer can contain features that annotate the vertices of each
track. `Tracks.features` stores the features in a table where each column
is the name of the feature and the values are rows with a value for
each vertex in the track (i.e., length `N` for `N` vertices in `Tracks.data`).
As we will see below, we can use the feature values to set the display
properties of the tracks (e.g., the track color).

## 3D rendering

All layers can be rendered in both 2D and 3D. One of the viewer buttons at the
bottom of the left panel can toggle between these 2 modes.
When in 2D, the button looks like this: ![image: 2D/3D button](../../_static/images/3D-button.png), ready to switch to 3D mode.
When in 3D, the button looks like this: ![image: 2D/3D button](../../_static/images/2D-button.png), ready to switch to 2D mode.

The number of dimensions sliders will be 2 or 3 less than the total number of
dimensions of the layer, allowing you to browse volumetric timeseries data and
other high dimensional data.

## Changing track width

We can specify the width of the tracks in pixels. The track width can be
specified via the `tail_width` keyword argument in the {meth}`viewer.add_tracks<napari.Viewer.add_tracks>` method.
From a layer that has already been constructed,
we can set the track width via the `layer.tail_width` property.

```python
# create a tracks layer with a tail width of 5 pixels
viewer = napari.Viewer()
viewer.add_tracks(data, tail_width=5, name="my_tracks")

# update the tail width to 3 pixels
viewer.layers["my_tracks"].tail_width = 3
```

Additionally, we can adjust the width of the track in the GUI using the
"tail width" slider in the `tracks` layer controls.

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_width.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_width.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_width.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="Changing tracks width using the tail width slider."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

## Changing tail length

We can specify the length of the tails of the tracks in time units. The tail is
the portion of the track displayed from previous time steps. The track tail
length can be specified via the `tail_length` keyword argument in the
{meth}`viewer.add_tracks<napari.Viewer.add_tracks>` method. From a layer that has
already been constructed, we can set the track width via the `tail_length`
property.

```python
# create a tracks layer with a tail length of 5 time units
viewer = napari.Viewer()
viewer.add_tracks(data, tail_length=5, name="my_tracks")

# update the tail width to 3 pixels
viewer.layers["my_tracks"].tail_length = 3

```

Additionally, we can adjust the width of the track in the GUI using the "tail
length" slider in the `tracks` layer controls.

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_length.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_length.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/tracks_tail_length.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="Changing tracks length using the tail width slider."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

## Setting the track color with features

We can color the tracks by mapping colors to the track features defined in
`Tracks.features`. If we define features and pass them via the `features`
keyword argument in the {meth}`viewer.add_tracks<napari.Viewer.add_tracks>`
method, we can then select the feature we would like to color the tracks by in
the "color by" dropdown menu in the `tracks` layer controls. We can additionally
specify the colormap used to map the feature value to color via the "colormap"
dropdown menu.

```python
import napari
import numpy as np
from skimage import data

hubble_image = data.hubble_deep_field()

tracks_data = np.asarray([
    [1, 0, 236, 0],
    [1, 1, 236, 100],
    [1, 2, 236, 200],
    [1, 3, 236, 500],
    [1, 4, 236, 1000],
    [2, 0, 436, 0],
    [2, 1, 436, 100],
    [2, 2, 436, 200],
    [2, 3, 436, 500],
    [2, 4, 436, 1000],
    [3, 0, 636, 0],
    [3, 1, 636, 100],
    [3, 2, 636, 200],
    [3, 3, 636, 500],
    [3, 4, 636, 1000]
])
track_confidence = np.array(5*[0.9] + 5*[0.3] + 5 * [0.1])
features = {
    'time': tracks_data[:, 1],
    'confidence': track_confidence
}

viewer, _ = napari.imshow(hubble_image)
viewer.add_tracks(tracks_data, features=features)
napari.run()
```

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_color_by.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_color_by.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/tracks_color_by.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="Selecting tracks by the time feature and changing the color."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

## Putting it all together

Here you can see an example of 3D+t tracks. You can view the source code for
this example in [](../../gallery/tracks_3d)

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_3d_t.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/tracks_3d_t.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/tracks_3d_t.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="3D rendering of tracks."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```
