docs/plugins/index.md, before:

(plugins-index)=
# Plugins

Plugins are a powerful way to extend the functionality of napari and share these extensions with the community.
While scripts and widgets can also be used to extend napari, plugins offer the most convenient method for publicly sharing additional features.

Check out the user focused content to guide you through installing and using napari plugins, or the developer focused content to start creating your own plugins for napari.

::::::{tab-set}
:::::{tab-item} For plugin users
::::{grid}
:::{grid-item-card} Start using plugins
:link: plugins-getting-started
:link-type: ref

Introduction to napari plugins, what they can provide, and where to get support.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} Finding and installing plugins
:link: find-and-install-plugins
:link-type: ref

How to find and install plugins from the napari plugin installer or napari hub.
:::
::::
:::::

:::::{tab-item} For plugin developers
::::{grid}
:::{grid-item-card} Building a plugin
:link: how-to-build-a-plugin
:link-type: ref
In depth guides to build a plugin for napari.

:::

:::{grid-item-card} Virtual environments and useful tools
:link: virtual-environments-and-useful-tools
:link-type: ref

Workshop on virtual environments and useful tools for plugin development.

::::

::::{grid}
:::{grid-item-card} Testing and publishing
:link: plugin-test-deploy
:link-type: ref

How to test your plugin works and how to publish it to PyPI,
along with some tips for making your plugin easy to find.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} Technical references
:link: plugin-technical-references
:link-type: ref

Technical references for the plugin system and the plugin API
and guides to convert from first generation plugins to npe2.
:::
::::
:::::
::::::

Commit message:

Edit plugin landing page to add links and update information (#581)
Partially addresses #582 

# References and relevant issues
Updates plugin landing page

# Description
Adds additional links and gives reader more context about what is a
plugin.

---------

Co-authored-by: Tim Monko <timmonko@gmail.com>

docs/plugins/index.md, after:

(plugins-index)=
# Plugins

Plugins extend napari's functionality, allowing for customization and sharing with the community.
While you can use scripts and widgets to extend napari, plugins provide great flexibility.
Existing plugins extend napari to add:
- support for import and export of image and related data types.
- support for working with specialized data formats.
- domain specific features, including microscopy, climate, geoscience, and more.
Share and discover napari plugins on [napari hub](https://napari-hub.org), 
[PyPI](https://pypi.org/search/?q=napari), or [conda-forge](https://conda-forge.org/packages/).
Interested in creating a plugin? A [napari-plugin-template](https://github.com/napari/napari-plugin-template),
a [copier](https://copier.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) template, bootstraps authoring
[npe](https://github.com/napari/npe2)-based napari plugins.

Check out the user focused guides for installing and using napari plugins, or plugin developer guides to start
creating your own napari plugins.

::::::{tab-set}
:::::{tab-item} For plugin users
::::{grid}
:::{grid-item-card} Start using plugins
:link: plugins-getting-started
:link-type: ref

Introduction to napari plugins, what they can provide, and where to get support.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} Finding and installing plugins
:link: find-and-install-plugins
:link-type: ref

How to find and install plugins using the napari plugin installer or napari hub.
:::
::::
:::::

:::::{tab-item} For plugin developers
::::{grid}
:::{grid-item-card} Building a plugin
:link: how-to-build-a-plugin
:link-type: ref
In depth guides to build a plugin for napari.

:::

:::{grid-item-card} Virtual environments and useful tools
:link: virtual-environments-and-useful-tools
:link-type: ref

Workshop on virtual environments and useful tools for plugin development.

::::

::::{grid}
:::{grid-item-card} Testing and publishing
:link: plugin-test-deploy
:link-type: ref

How to test your plugin works and how to publish it,
along with some tips for making your plugin easy to find.
:::

:::{grid-item-card} Technical references
:link: plugin-technical-references
:link-type: ref

Technical references for the plugin system and the plugin API
and guides to convert from first generation plugins to npe2.
:::
::::
:::::
::::::
