docs/guides/layers.md, before:

(layers-glance)=
# Layers at a glance

{class}`~napari.layers` are the basic viewable objects that can be added to a
viewer. **napari** supports seven main different layer types: `Image`, `Labels`,
`Points`, `Shapes`, `Surface`, `Tracks` and `Vectors`. Each of the layer types
corresponds to a different data type, visualization, and interactivity. You can
add multiple layers of different types into the viewer and then start working
with them, adjusting their properties.

All our layer types support n-dimensional data and the viewer provides the
ability to quickly browse and visualize either 2D or 3D slices of the data.

After creating a {class}`napari.Viewer` object, each layer for this object can
be created by a corresponding `viewer.add_<layer>` method. For example, to add
an {class}`Image layer <napari.layers.Image>` named `astronaut` to the `viewer`
object created from `data`, you can do

```python
viewer = napari.Viewer()
viewer.add_image(data, name='astronaut')
```

To learn more about the layers available, see the
[Layers documentation](napari.layers). To learn about how to use the layers
currently supported by napari, check out the
[Using layers how-to guides](using-layers). For a gentle
introduction, check out the
[Layer list section in the napari viewer tutorial](layer-list).

## Layer visibility

All our layers support a visibility toggle that allows you to set the `visible`
property of each layer. This property is located inside the layer widget in the
layers list and is represented by an eye icon indicating the `visibility`
button. Note that you can Option/Alt-click on the `visibility` button to show
*just* that one layer, hiding all others. If you then Option/Alt-click on the
`visibility` button of a layer a second time, the visibility state of all layers
will be restored.

(layer_opacity)=
## Layer opacity

All our layers support an opacity slider and `opacity` property that allow you
to adjust the layer opacity between 0, fully invisible and 1, fully visible.

```{note}
* For the [points layer](napari.layers.Points), the opacity value applies
globally to all the points in the layer, and so you don't need to have any
points selected for it to have an effect.
* For the [shapes layer](napari.layers.Shapes), the opacity value applies
globally to all shapes in the layer, and so you don't need to have any
shape selected for it to have an effect.
* For the [vectors layer](napari.layers.Vectors), the opacity value applies
globally to all the vectors in the layer.
* For the [tracks layer](napari.layers.Tracks), the opacity value applies globally to all the tracks in the layer.
```

(blending-layers)=
## Blending layers

All our layers support a number of different blending modes. These modes
determine how the visuals for this layer get mixed with the visuals from the
other layers.

* A `translucent` setting will cause the layer to blend with the layers below
  it if you decrease its opacity but will fully block those layers if its
  opacity is `1`. This is a reasonable default, useful for many applications.
* A `translucent-no depth` setting allows for multiple layers to be blended with
  different opacity, but no depth testing is performed.
* An `additive` blending mode will cause the layer to blend with the layers
  below even when it has full opacity. This mode is especially useful for
  visualizing multiple layers at the same time, such as cell biology
  applications where you have multiple different components of a cell labeled in
  different colors.
* A `minimum` blending mode will cause the layer to blend using the minimum of
  each pixel's R, G, and B values. This mode is uniquely useful for blending
  multiple layers with inverted colormaps/LUTs, which represent measured signal
  with color on a white background.
* An `opaque` layer hides any layer data below it.

For example, the image below shows an image with the blending set to `additive`.

![napari viewer with an image of a cell. Layer controls are open in the left sidebar with the blending set to additive.](./images/blending.png)

## 3D rendering of images

All our layers can be rendered in both 2D and 3D mode, and one of our viewer
buttons can toggle between each mode. The number of dimensions sliders will be 2
or 3 less than the total number of dimensions of the layer, allowing you to
browse volumetric timeseries data and other high dimensional data. See for
example these cells undergoing mitosis in this volumetric timeseries:

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../_static/images/mitosis.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../_static/images/mitosis.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../_static/images/mitosis.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="napari viewer with an image of a cell undergoing mitosis. The scroll bar below the canvas controls the timeseries, allowing different stages of mitosis to be visible."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

```{note}
Switching to 3D mode for a very large data set could trigger computation that
leads to a memory error.
```

(layer-interpolation)=
## Layer interpolation

We support a variety of interpolation modes when viewing 2D slices. In the
default mode `nearest` each pixel is represented as a small square of specified
size. As you zoom in you will eventually see each pixel. In other modes
neighbouring pixels are blended together according to different functions, for
example `bicubic`, which can lead to smoother looking images. For most
scientific use cases, `nearest` is recommended because it displays each data
point, with no mixing of nearby data points. These modes have no effect when
viewing 3D slices.

## Layer rendering

When viewing 3D slices, we support a variety of rendering modes. The default
mode `mip`, or maximum intensity projection, will combine voxels at different
distances from the camera according to a maximum intensity projection to create
the 2D image that is then displayed on the screen. This mode works well for many
biological images such as these cells growing in culture:

![napari viewer with an image of cells in a culture. Layer controls are open in the left sidebar and rendering set to mip.](./images/rendering.png)

When viewing 2D slices the rendering mode has no effect.

## Naming layers

All our layers support a `name` property that can be set inside a text box
inside the layer widget in the layers list. The name of each layer is forced
into being unique so that you can use the name to index into `viewer.layers` to
retrieve the layer object.

## Scaling layers

All our layers support a `scale` property and keyword argument that will rescale
the layer multiplicatively according to the scale values (one for each
dimension). This property can be particularly useful for viewing anisotropic
volumes where the size of the voxel in the z dimension might be different then
the size in the x and y dimensions.

In napari, you can scale the layers when creating an image layer or for an
existing layer using the `scale` as a keyword argument or property respectively.

```python
# scaling while creating the image layer
napari.view_image(retina, name='retina', scale=[1,10,1,1])
# scaling an existing layer
viewer.layers['retina'].scale = [1,10,1,1]
```

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../_static/images/scaling.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../_static/images/scaling.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../_static/images/scaling.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="napari viewer with an image where all layers are scaled equally; when rotated, the image appears flat. By using console below the canvas and applying a scale factor to one of the dimensions, the image's volume becomes apparent."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

## Translating layers

All our layers support a `translate` property and keyword argument that you can
use to offset a layer relative to the other layers, which could be useful if you
are trying to overlay two image tiles acquired with different stage positions.

## Layer metadata

All our layers also support a `metadata` property and keyword argument that you
can use to store an arbitrary metadata dictionary on the layer.

Commit message:

Add basic layer modes description ('pan_zoom' and 'transform')

docs/guides/layers.md, after:

(layers-glance)=
# Layers at a glance

{class}`~napari.layers` are the basic viewable objects that can be added to a
viewer. **napari** supports seven main different layer types: `Image`, `Labels`,
`Points`, `Shapes`, `Surface`, `Tracks` and `Vectors`. Each of the layer types
corresponds to a different data type, visualization, and interactivity. You can
add multiple layers of different types into the viewer and then start working
with them, adjusting their properties.

All our layer types support n-dimensional data and the viewer provides the
ability to quickly browse and visualize either 2D or 3D slices of the data.

After creating a {class}`napari.Viewer` object, each layer for this object can
be created by a corresponding `viewer.add_<layer>` method. For example, to add
an {class}`Image layer <napari.layers.Image>` named `astronaut` to the `viewer`
object created from `data`, you can do

```python
viewer = napari.Viewer()
viewer.add_image(data, name='astronaut')
```

To learn more about the layers available, see the
[Layers documentation](napari.layers). To learn about how to use the layers
currently supported by napari, check out the
[Using layers how-to guides](using-layers). For a gentle
introduction, check out the
[Layer list section in the napari viewer tutorial](layer-list).

(layer_mode)=
## Layer mode

All our layers support a `mode` property that changes the way you interact
with the layer from the viewer. These modes are accesible via the layer controls widget top buttons and via shortcuts (pressing a number from `1` to the number of modes available for the layer). Depending on the layer type, more modes could be available. Currently, there are two base modes: Pan and zoom (`pan_zoom`) and Transform (`transform`):

* Pan and zoom
![image: Pan/zoom](../images/pan-zoom-tool.png)

The `pan_zoom` mode allows you to pan around and zoom in/out the layer. It's the default mode selected.

* Transform
![image: Transform](../images/transform-tool.png)

The `transform` mode allows you to translate, rotate, and scale the layer graphically. To reset the transformation, you can Option/Alt-click the transform button over the layer controls (a confirmation dialog will open to confirm the reset).

For a more detailed description of layer modes available check each [layer how-to guide](using-layers).

## Layer visibility

All our layers support a visibility toggle that allows you to set the `visible`
property of each layer. This property is located inside the layer widget in the
layers list and is represented by an eye icon indicating the `visibility`
button. Note that you can Option/Alt-click on the `visibility` button to show
*just* that one layer, hiding all others. If you then Option/Alt-click on the
`visibility` button of a layer a second time, the visibility state of all layers
will be restored.

(layer_opacity)=
## Layer opacity

All our layers support an opacity slider and `opacity` property that allow you
to adjust the layer opacity between 0, fully invisible and 1, fully visible.

```{note}
* For the [points layer](napari.layers.Points), the opacity value applies
globally to all the points in the layer, and so you don't need to have any
points selected for it to have an effect.
* For the [shapes layer](napari.layers.Shapes), the opacity value applies
globally to all shapes in the layer, and so you don't need to have any
shape selected for it to have an effect.
* For the [vectors layer](napari.layers.Vectors), the opacity value applies
globally to all the vectors in the layer.
* For the [tracks layer](napari.layers.Tracks), the opacity value applies globally to all the tracks in the layer.
```

(blending-layers)=
## Blending layers

All our layers support a number of different blending modes. These modes
determine how the visuals for this layer get mixed with the visuals from the
other layers.

* A `translucent` setting will cause the layer to blend with the layers below
  it if you decrease its opacity but will fully block those layers if its
  opacity is `1`. This is a reasonable default, useful for many applications.
* A `translucent-no depth` setting allows for multiple layers to be blended with
  different opacity, but no depth testing is performed.
* An `additive` blending mode will cause the layer to blend with the layers
  below even when it has full opacity. This mode is especially useful for
  visualizing multiple layers at the same time, such as cell biology
  applications where you have multiple different components of a cell labeled in
  different colors.
* A `minimum` blending mode will cause the layer to blend using the minimum of
  each pixel's R, G, and B values. This mode is uniquely useful for blending
  multiple layers with inverted colormaps/LUTs, which represent measured signal
  with color on a white background.
* An `opaque` layer hides any layer data below it.

For example, the image below shows an image with the blending set to `additive`.

![napari viewer with an image of a cell. Layer controls are open in the left sidebar with the blending set to additive.](./images/blending.png)

## 3D rendering of images

All our layers can be rendered in both 2D and 3D mode, and one of our viewer
buttons can toggle between each mode. The number of dimensions sliders will be 2
or 3 less than the total number of dimensions of the layer, allowing you to
browse volumetric timeseries data and other high dimensional data. See for
example these cells undergoing mitosis in this volumetric timeseries:

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../_static/images/mitosis.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../_static/images/mitosis.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../_static/images/mitosis.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="napari viewer with an image of a cell undergoing mitosis. The scroll bar below the canvas controls the timeseries, allowing different stages of mitosis to be visible."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

```{note}
Switching to 3D mode for a very large data set could trigger computation that
leads to a memory error.
```

(layer-interpolation)=
## Layer interpolation

We support a variety of interpolation modes when viewing 2D slices. In the
default mode `nearest` each pixel is represented as a small square of specified
size. As you zoom in you will eventually see each pixel. In other modes
neighbouring pixels are blended together according to different functions, for
example `bicubic`, which can lead to smoother looking images. For most
scientific use cases, `nearest` is recommended because it displays each data
point, with no mixing of nearby data points. These modes have no effect when
viewing 3D slices.

## Layer rendering

When viewing 3D slices, we support a variety of rendering modes. The default
mode `mip`, or maximum intensity projection, will combine voxels at different
distances from the camera according to a maximum intensity projection to create
the 2D image that is then displayed on the screen. This mode works well for many
biological images such as these cells growing in culture:

![napari viewer with an image of cells in a culture. Layer controls are open in the left sidebar and rendering set to mip.](./images/rendering.png)

When viewing 2D slices the rendering mode has no effect.

## Naming layers

All our layers support a `name` property that can be set inside a text box
inside the layer widget in the layers list. The name of each layer is forced
into being unique so that you can use the name to index into `viewer.layers` to
retrieve the layer object.

## Scaling layers

All our layers support a `scale` property and keyword argument that will rescale
the layer multiplicatively according to the scale values (one for each
dimension). This property can be particularly useful for viewing anisotropic
volumes where the size of the voxel in the z dimension might be different then
the size in the x and y dimensions.

In napari, you can scale the layers when creating an image layer or for an
existing layer using the `scale` as a keyword argument or property respectively.

```python
# scaling while creating the image layer
napari.view_image(retina, name='retina', scale=[1,10,1,1])
# scaling an existing layer
viewer.layers['retina'].scale = [1,10,1,1]
```

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../_static/images/scaling.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../_static/images/scaling.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../_static/images/scaling.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="napari viewer with an image where all layers are scaled equally; when rotated, the image appears flat. By using console below the canvas and applying a scale factor to one of the dimensions, the image's volume becomes apparent."
    >
  </video>
</figure>
```

## Translating layers

All our layers support a `translate` property and keyword argument that you can
use to offset a layer relative to the other layers, which could be useful if you
are trying to overlay two image tiles acquired with different stage positions.

## Layer metadata

All our layers also support a `metadata` property and keyword argument that you
can use to store an arbitrary metadata dictionary on the layer.
