docs/developers/contributing/documentation/docs_deployment.md, before:

(docs-deployment)=

# Documentation and website deployment

```{note}
This guide is intended for napari core contributors and is not required reading
for regular contributors. If you're looking for information on how to contribute
to the documentation, see [](contributing-docs).
```

The napari documentation and website sources are spread over three repositories,
and these are connected and used to generate the documentation and website
through several CI workflows detailed below.

1. [`napari/napari`](https://github.com/napari/napari)
    - **Workflow file:** [`build_docs.yml`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/.github/workflows/build_docs.yml)
        - **job:** `build-and-upload`
        - Pulls in sources from `napari/docs` and builds docs locally. Uploads
          artifacts to this repository (`napari/napari`).
        - This is triggered on any push to a branch named 'docs*' or tag named 'v*',
          to `napari/napari`. The artifact can be used to check the documentation
          but is not used for docs deployment.
    - **Workflow file:** [`deploy_docs.yml`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/.github/workflows/deploy_docs.yml)
        - **job:** `build-napari-docs`
        - Triggers [`build_and_deploy.yml`](https://github.com/napari/docs/blob/main/.github/workflows/build_and_deploy.yml)
          workflow at the [napari/docs](https://github.com/napari/docs) repo.
          Waits for results and reports it.
        - This is triggered on any commit to the `main` branch on
          `napari/napari` (and consequently triggers a new deployment of the
          `napari.org` website). When the commit is tagged, the `build_and_deploy.yml`
          workflow will deploy to the version folder e.g., '{{ napari_version }}/'.

2. [`napari/docs`](https://github.com/napari/docs)
    - **Workflow file:** [`build_and_deploy.yml`](https://github.com/napari/docs/blob/main/.github/workflows/build_and_deploy.yml)
        - **job:** `build-and-upload`
        - Pulls in sources from `napari/napari`, builds docs, then uploads as an
          artifact named 'html' to this repository (`napari/docs`).
        - This is triggered on every Pull Request and shows up as a "Build & Deploy PR
          Docs / Build & Uplod Artifact" check on the PR.
        - **job:** `deploy`
        - Downloads the artifact from the `build-and-upload` job and deploys the html
          to GitHub pages at the `gh-pages` branch of
          [napari/napari.github.io](https://github.com/napari/napari.github.io/tree/gh-pages).
        - Always deploys to the `dev/` folder on `napari.github.io` (version
          "latest" on the website).
        - Deployment is triggered by any commit to the `main` branch on `napari/docs`
          (and consequently triggers a new deployment of the `napari.org`
          website.)

    Note that these files are not identical to the `napari/napari` version.

3. [`napari/napari.github.io`](https://github.com/napari/napari.github.io)
    - Contains built documentation files (.html) for all versions in the
      `gh-pages` branch. Auto-deploys to `gh-pages` on every commit (which in
      turn happens on every commit to the `main` branches of either
      `napari/napari` or `napari/docs`).

## Notes

CircleCI is set up in both `napari/napari` and `napari/docs`, but doesn't deploy
documentation. It serves to test the docs build and to provide documentation
previews for PRs. The relevant configuration files are:

- On `napari/napari`:
  - [`.circleci/config.yml`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/.circleci/config.yml): builds documentation and stores artifact in the CircleCI platform
  - [`.github/workflows/circleci.yml`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/.github/workflows/circleci.yml): adds a link to the documentation preview to each PR.

- On `napari/docs`:
  - [`.circleci/config.yml`](https://github.com/napari/docs/blob/main/.circleci/config.yml): builds documentation and stores artifact in the CircleCI platform
  - [`.github/workflows/circleci.yml`](https://github.com/napari/docs/blob/main/.github/workflows/circleci.yml): adds a link to the documentation preview to each PR.

Commit message:

Add note about unversioned pages machinery to contributing guide (#421)
# References and relevant issues
Depends on https://github.com/napari/napari.github.io/pull/402

# Description
Adds a note to the "documentation and website deployment" section of the
contributing guide about how the unversioned pages are managed.

Co-authored-by: Juan Nunez-Iglesias <jni@fastmail.com>

docs/developers/contributing/documentation/docs_deployment.md, after:

(docs-deployment)=

# Documentation and website deployment

```{note}
This guide is intended for napari core contributors and is not required reading
for regular contributors. If you're looking for information on how to contribute
to the documentation, see [](contributing-docs).
```

The napari documentation and website sources are spread over three repositories,
and these are connected and used to generate the documentation and website
through several CI workflows detailed below.

1. [`napari/napari`](https://github.com/napari/napari)
    - **Workflow file:** [`build_docs.yml`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/.github/workflows/build_docs.yml)
        - **job:** `build-and-upload`
        - Pulls in sources from `napari/docs` and builds docs locally. Uploads
          artifacts to this repository (`napari/napari`).
        - This is triggered on any push to a branch named 'docs*' or tag named 'v*',
          to `napari/napari`. The artifact can be used to check the documentation
          but is not used for docs deployment.
    - **Workflow file:** [`deploy_docs.yml`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/.github/workflows/deploy_docs.yml)
        - **job:** `build-napari-docs`
        - Triggers [`build_and_deploy.yml`](https://github.com/napari/docs/blob/main/.github/workflows/build_and_deploy.yml)
          workflow at the [napari/docs](https://github.com/napari/docs) repo.
          Waits for results and reports it.
        - This is triggered on any commit to the `main` branch on
          `napari/napari` (and consequently triggers a new deployment of the
          `napari.org` website). When the commit is tagged, the `build_and_deploy.yml`
          workflow will deploy to the version folder e.g., '{{ napari_version }}/'.

2. [`napari/docs`](https://github.com/napari/docs)
    - **Workflow file:** [`build_and_deploy.yml`](https://github.com/napari/docs/blob/main/.github/workflows/build_and_deploy.yml)
        - **job:** `build-and-upload`
        - Pulls in sources from `napari/napari`, builds docs, then uploads as an
          artifact named 'html' to this repository (`napari/docs`).
        - This is triggered on every Pull Request and shows up as a "Build & Deploy PR
          Docs / Build & Uplod Artifact" check on the PR.
        - **job:** `deploy`
        - Downloads the artifact from the `build-and-upload` job and deploys the html
          to GitHub pages at the `gh-pages` branch of
          [napari/napari.github.io](https://github.com/napari/napari.github.io/tree/gh-pages).
        - Always deploys to the `dev/` folder on `napari.github.io` (version
          "latest" on the website).
        - Deployment is triggered by any commit to the `main` branch on `napari/docs`
          (and consequently triggers a new deployment of the `napari.org`
          website.)

    Note that these files are not identical to the `napari/napari` version.

3. [`napari/napari.github.io`](https://github.com/napari/napari.github.io)
    - Contains built documentation files (.html) for all versions in the
      `gh-pages` branch. Auto-deploys to `gh-pages` on every commit (which in
      turn happens on every commit to the `main` branches of either
      `napari/napari` or `napari/docs`).
    - For every commit to the `gh-pages` branch of this repo, the
      [`unversioned_pages.yml` action](https://github.com/napari/napari.github.io/blob/main/.github/workflows/unversioned_pages.yml)
      is triggered and copies the latest contents of the index page and the dev
      folder over the "stable" version of the documentation. This ensures that
      both the landing page of the website and the developer documentation,
      including the contributing guide, are always up to date.

## Notes

CircleCI is set up in both `napari/napari` and `napari/docs`, but doesn't deploy
documentation. It serves to test the docs build and to provide documentation
previews for PRs. The relevant configuration files are:

- On `napari/napari`:
  - [`.circleci/config.yml`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/.circleci/config.yml): builds documentation and stores artifact in the CircleCI platform
  - [`.github/workflows/circleci.yml`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/.github/workflows/circleci.yml): adds a link to the documentation preview to each PR.

- On `napari/docs`:
  - [`.circleci/config.yml`](https://github.com/napari/docs/blob/main/.circleci/config.yml): builds documentation and stores artifact in the CircleCI platform
  - [`.github/workflows/circleci.yml`](https://github.com/napari/docs/blob/main/.github/workflows/circleci.yml): adds a link to the documentation preview to each PR.
