docs/plugins/testing_workshop_docs/Pythons-assert-keyword.md, before:

This article will be more valuable if you are familiar with the Python programming language and Napari software. It is the first in a series of articles on testing taken from the [January 2022 testing workshop video](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1DaMrRz-rLRQ6-_y0J8O3GRpVPCn0rgYs/view). The information in this article starts at minute 5:23. This article is a summary of the information in the video and should stand on its own. The other articles are:  
Article 1: This article  
Article 2: [Pytest testing framework](\Pytest-testing-frameworks)  
Article 3: [Napari plugins](\Napari-Plugins)  
Article 4: [Test coverage](\Test-Coverage)  
Article 5: Testing widgets  
  
This article covers:  
[Test for Pass](#test-for-pass)  
[Test for Fail](#test-for-fail)  

Resources
The example plugin and all the tests discussed in this article are available in [this GitHub repository](https://github.com/DragaDoncila/plugin-tests).
  
The key to testing in Python is the [assert](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1RFja0o6cZ8lAalAve8heuJ-Lrb4nOSUnfdpOSEhqqNo/edit#slide=id.g107356847e4_0_22) keyword. We *assert* a Boolean expression is true and create an error message that appears when that expression is false. 
    
    `assert <Boolean expression>, <error message>`  
    
If it is true, code execution continues as though the assert statement doesn’t exist. If the Boolean expression is false, an `AssertionError` is thrown, an exception raised, and the error message displayed. 
  
Here is a simple function, `get_grade_from_mark`. It takes a mark (score) from zero to 100. If the mark (score) is more than 50, the grade is `Pass`; if it’s less than 50, the grade is `Fail`.  

    def get_grade_from_mark(mark):  
         if mark > 50  
             return “Pass”  
         else:   
             return “Fail”  

`get_grade_from_mark` can be tested by writing two test functions. The first one is for when the mark is > 50.   
  
  
## Test for Pass
When the mark is > 50, call `get_grade_from_mark` and assert that the grade is what we expect (either `Pass` or `Fail`). When testing the passing case, test that the grade is `Pass`. If it's not `Pass`, best practice is to write a helpful error message like, `“Expected {mark} to pass but result was {grade}.”` 

    def test_get_grade_pass(mark):  
         grade = get_grade_from_mark(mark):  
         assert grade == “Pass”, f”Expected {mark} to pass, but result was{grade}”  
  
## Test for Fail  
Test the same thing for `Fail` to test all options. Everything is almost the same, so copy and paste and change a few words to create the second test.  
  
    def test_get_grade_fail(mark):  
        grade = get_grade_from_mark(mark):  
        assert grade == “Fail”, f”Expected {mark} to fail, but result was{grade}”  
  
We can now write code to run both of the functions with expected values. For example, we expect 65 to pass and 43 to fail. After running both functions, if no exception has been raised we print “All passing.”  
  
    if name == “_main_”;`  
          test_get_grade_pass(65)  
          test_get_grade_fail(43)  
          print(“All passing.”)  

We can place all this code in a Python file, e.g. `example_test.py`, and run it from the command line. 
  
    (napari-env) user@directory % python example_test.py  
    All passing. 

That all passes. 

Updating the test to see a test failure:  

    if name == “_main_”;  
        test_get_grade_pass(65)  
        test_get_grade_fail(70)  # updated this to 70 to force failure  
        print(“All passing.”)  

If we assert that 70 fails, the `AssertionError`, “Expected something to fail, but the result was pass.” would be thrown, which is correct. It would look like this:  

    (napari-env) user@directory % python example_func.py  
    Traceback (most recent call last):  
    File “/Users/user/directory/example_test.py” line 20, in <module> test_get_grade_fail(70)  
    File “/Users/user/directory/example_test.py” line 16, in <module> test_get_grade_fail  
    Assert grade == “Fail”, f”Expected {mark} to fail, but result was {grade}”  
    AssertionError: Expected 70 to fail, but result was Pass.   

Note that when the assertion fails, traceback occurs. 

This example is a simple way to demonstrate the use of the assert keyword, but it’s not particularly useful for testing a larger codebase. This test function has to be called explicitly to test different marks. There’s not much detail when the code is running. We just get `“All passing.”` and there’s no information about other tests when one of the tests fails.  
  
Making testing more convenient is where [Pytest testing frameworks](\Pytest-testing-frameworks) come in.

Commit message:

Renamed Napari plugins to Readers and fixtures and fixed TOC.
Co-authored-by: Sean Martin <martins7@tcd.ie>

docs/plugins/testing_workshop_docs/Pythons-assert-keyword.md, after:

# Python's assert keyword

## Article information

This article will be more valuable if you are familiar with the Python programming language and Napari software. It is the first in a series of articles on testing taken from the [January 2022 testing workshop video](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1DaMrRz-rLRQ6-_y0J8O3GRpVPCn0rgYs/view). The information in this article starts at minute 5:23. This article is a summary of the information in the video and should stand on its own. The other articles are:

Article 1: This article  
Article 2: [Pytest testing framework](./Pytest-testing-frameworks)  
Article 3: [Readers and fixtures](./Readers-and-fixtures)  
Article 4: [Test coverage](./Test-Coverage)  
Article 5: Testing widgets  
  
### This article covers
[Test for Pass](#test-for-pass)  
[Test for Fail](#test-for-fail)  

### Resources
The example plugin and all the tests discussed in this article are available in [this GitHub repository](https://github.com/DragaDoncila/plugin-tests).
  
The key to testing in Python is the [assert](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1RFja0o6cZ8lAalAve8heuJ-Lrb4nOSUnfdpOSEhqqNo/edit#slide=id.g107356847e4_0_22) keyword. We *assert* a Boolean expression is true and create an error message that appears when that expression is false. 
    
    `assert <Boolean expression>, <error message>`  
    
If it is true, code execution continues as though the assert statement doesn’t exist. If the Boolean expression is false, an `AssertionError` is thrown, an exception raised, and the error message displayed. 
  
Here is a simple function, `get_grade_from_mark`. It takes a mark (score) from zero to 100. If the mark (score) is more than 50, the grade is `Pass`; if it’s less than 50, the grade is `Fail`.  

```python
def get_grade_from_mark(mark):
    if mark > 50: 
        return "Pass"
    else:   
       return "Fail"
```
         if mark > 50  
             return “Pass”  
         else:   
             return “Fail”  

`get_grade_from_mark` can be tested by writing two test functions. The first one is for when the mark is > 50.   
  
  
## Test for Pass
When the mark is > 50, call `get_grade_from_mark` and assert that the grade is what we expect (either `Pass` or `Fail`). When testing the passing case, test that the grade is `Pass`. If it's not `Pass`, best practice is to write a helpful error message like, `“Expected {mark} to pass but result was {grade}.”` 

    def test_get_grade_pass(mark):  
         grade = get_grade_from_mark(mark):  
         assert grade == “Pass”, f”Expected {mark} to pass, but result was{grade}”  
  
## Test for Fail  
Test the same thing for `Fail` to test all options. Everything is almost the same, so copy and paste and change a few words to create the second test.  
  
    def test_get_grade_fail(mark):  
        grade = get_grade_from_mark(mark):  
        assert grade == “Fail”, f”Expected {mark} to fail, but result was{grade}”  
  
We can now write code to run both of the functions with expected values. For example, we expect 65 to pass and 43 to fail. After running both functions, if no exception has been raised we print “All passing.”  
  
    if name == “_main_”;`  
          test_get_grade_pass(65)  
          test_get_grade_fail(43)  
          print(“All passing.”)  

We can place all this code in a Python file, e.g. `example_test.py`, and run it from the command line. 
  
    (napari-env) user@directory % python example_test.py  
    All passing. 

That all passes. 

Updating the test to see a test failure:  

    if name == “_main_”;  
        test_get_grade_pass(65)  
        test_get_grade_fail(70)  # updated this to 70 to force failure  
        print(“All passing.”)  

If we assert that 70 fails, the `AssertionError`, “Expected something to fail, but the result was pass.” would be thrown, which is correct. It would look like this:  

    (napari-env) user@directory % python example_func.py  
    Traceback (most recent call last):  
    File “/Users/user/directory/example_test.py” line 20, in <module> test_get_grade_fail(70)  
    File “/Users/user/directory/example_test.py” line 16, in <module> test_get_grade_fail  
    Assert grade == “Fail”, f”Expected {mark} to fail, but result was {grade}”  
    AssertionError: Expected 70 to fail, but result was Pass.   

Note that when the assertion fails, traceback occurs. 

This example is a simple way to demonstrate the use of the assert keyword, but it’s not particularly useful for testing a larger codebase. This test function has to be called explicitly to test different marks. There’s not much detail when the code is running. We just get `“All passing.”` and there’s no information about other tests when one of the tests fails.  
  
Making testing more convenient is where [Pytest testing frameworks](./Pytest-testing-frameworks) come in.
