docs/index.md, before:

---
theme:
  metaDescription: napari is a fast, interactive, multi-dimensional image viewer for Python. It's designed for browsing, annotating, and analyzing large multi-dimensional images. It's built on top of Qt (for the GUI), vispy (for performant GPU-based rendering), and the scientific Python stack (numpy, scipy).
  quickLinks:
    - title: Community
      content: Meet the team, our mission, and our values
      url: /community/index.html

    - title: Tutorials
      content: Step by step guides for common napari workflows
      url: /tutorials/index.html

    - title: Plugins
      content: Learn how to create a plugin that works with the napari ecosystem
      url: /plugins/index.html

    - title: Release notes
      content: See what’s been updated in the latest releases
      url: /release/index.html

    - title: API reference
      content: Information on specific functions, classes, and methods
      url: /api/index.html

    - title: Roadmaps
      content: Find out what we plan to build next and into the near future
      url: /roadmaps/index.html

    - title: Developer guides
      content: Explanations about how napari works behind the screen
      url: /guides/index.html

    - title: Developer resources
      content: All you need to know to contribute to the napari codebase
      url: /developers/index.html

    - title: Source code
      content: Jump out to GitHub to take a look at the code that runs napari
      url: https://github.com/napari/napari

    - title: napari hub
      content: Discover, install, and share napari plugins
      url: https://www.napari-hub.org
---

# napari

## Multi-dimensional image viewer for python

[![image.sc forum](https://img.shields.io/badge/dynamic/json.svg?label=forum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fforum.image.sc%2Ftags%2Fnapari.json&query=%24.topic_list.tags.0.topic_count&colorB=brightgreen&suffix=%20topics&logo=data:image/png;base64,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)](https://forum.image.sc/tag/napari)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/napari.svg)](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/napari/napari/main/LICENSE)
[![Build Status](https://api.cirrus-ci.com/github/Napari/napari.svg)](https://cirrus-ci.com/napari/napari)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/napari/napari/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/napari/napari)
[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/napari.svg)](https://python.org)
[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/napari.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/napari)
[![PyPI - Downloads](https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/napari.svg)](https://pypistats.org/packages/napari)
[![Development Status](https://img.shields.io/pypi/status/napari.svg)](https://github.com/napari/napari)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/144513571.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/144513571)

---

**napari** is a fast, interactive, multi-dimensional image viewer for Python.
It's designed for browsing, annotating, and analyzing large multi-dimensional
images. It's built on top of `Qt` (for the GUI), `vispy` (for performant
GPU-based rendering), and the scientific Python stack (`numpy`, `scipy`). It
includes critical viewer features out-of-the-box, such as support for large
multi-dimensional data, and layering and annotation. By integrating closely with
the Python ecosystem, **napari** can be easily coupled to leading machine
learning and image analysis tools (e.g. `scikit-image`, `scikit-learn`,
`TensorFlow`, `PyTorch`), enabling more user-friendly automated analysis.

![image](./images/multichannel_cells.png)

We're developing **napari** in the open! But the project is in an **alpha**
stage, and there will still likely be **breaking changes** with each release.
You can follow progress
[on our GitHub repository](https://github.com/napari/napari), test out new
versions as we release them, and contribute ideas and code.

## Installation

### Which distribution to install

If you want to contribute back to the napari codebase, you should install from
source code: see the [from source](from-source) section.

If you only wish to use napari as GUI app (and not from python code), the
[bundled app](./tutorials/fundamentals/installation.md#install-as-a-bundled-app)
is the easiest way to install, it does not require having python pre-installed.

If you are using napari from Python to programmatically interact with the app,
you can install via pip, conda-forge, or from source.

### From pip, with "batteries included"

napari can be installed on most macOS, Linux, and Windows systems with Python
{{ python_version_range }} using pip:

```sh
pip install "napari[all]"
```

_(See `Specifying a GUI Backend` below for an explanation of the `[all]` notation.)_

````{important}
While not strictly required, it is *highly* recommended to install
napari into a clean virtual environment using an environment manager like
[conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) or
[venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html). 
This should be set up before you install napari. For example, with conda:

{{ conda_env_python_version }}
```
````

### From conda

```sh
conda install -c conda-forge napari
```

(from-source)=
### Current development branch from github

To install the current `main` branch on github (which will usually be ahead
of the latest release on pypi)

```sh
pip install "git+https://github.com/napari/napari.git#egg=napari[all]"
```

For more information or troubleshooting see our [installation
tutorial](./tutorials/fundamentals/installation)

````{admonition} Specifying a GUI Backend
:class: tip

napari needs a library called [Qt](https://www.qt.io/) to run its user interface
(UI). In Python, there are two alternative libraries to run this, called
[PyQt5](https://www.riverbankcomputing.com/software/pyqt/download5) and
[PySide2](https://doc.qt.io/qtforpython/). By default, we don't choose for you,
and simply running `pip install napari` will not install either. You *might*
already have one of them installed in your environment, thanks to other
scientific packages such as Spyder or matplotlib. If neither is available,
running napari will result in an error message asking you to install one of
them.

Running `pip install "napari[all]"` will install the default framework – currently
PyQt5, but this could change in the future.

To install napari with a specific framework, you can use:

```sh
pip install "napari[pyqt5]"    # for PyQt5

# OR
pip install "napari[pyside2]"  # for PySide2
```
````

## Getting started

 If you are new to napari, check out our
 [getting started guide](tutorials/fundamentals/getting_started.md).

### Example

(The example below requires the `scikit-image` package to run. We just use data
samples from this package for demonstration purposes. If you change the example
to use your own dataset, you may not need to install this package.)

From inside an IPython shell or jupyter notebook you can open up an interactive
viewer by calling:

```python
from skimage import data
import napari

viewer = napari.view_image(data.astronaut(), rgb=True)
```

![image](./images/screenshot-add-image.png)

To do the same thing inside a script call (note the call to {func}`napari.run` at
the end)

```python
from skimage import data
import napari

viewer = napari.view_image(data.astronaut(), rgb=True)
napari.run()  # start the event loop and show viewer
```

## Features

Check out the scripts in our
[`examples` folder](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/examples)
to see some of the functionality we're developing!

**napari** supports six main different layer types, `Image`, `Labels`, `Points`,
`Vectors`, `Shapes`, and `Surface`, each corresponding to a different data type,
visualization, and interactivity. You can add multiple layers of different types
into the viewer and then start working with them, adjusting their properties.

All our layer types support n-dimensional data and the viewer provides the
ability to quickly browse and visualize either 2D or 3D slices of the data.

**napari** also supports bidirectional communication between the viewer and the
Python kernel, which is especially useful when launching from jupyter notebooks
or when using our built-in console. Using the console allows you to
interactively load and save data from the viewer and control all the features of
the viewer programmatically.

You can extend **napari** using custom shortcuts, key bindings, and mouse
functions.

## Tutorials

For more details on how to use `napari` checkout our [tutorials](./tutorials/index).
These are still a work in progress, but we'll be updating them regularly.

## Mission, values, and roadmap

For more information about our plans for `napari` you can read our [mission and
values statement](./community/mission_and_values.md), which includes more
details on our vision for supporting a plugin ecosystem around napari.

## Contributing

Contributions are encouraged! Please read our [contributing
guide](./developers/contributing.md) to get started. Given that we're in an
early stage, you may want to reach out on our [Github
Issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues) before jumping in.

## Code of conduct

`napari` has a [Code of Conduct](./community/code_of_conduct) that should be
honored by everyone who participates in the `napari` community.

## Governance

You can learn more about how the `napari` project is organized and managed from
our [governance model](./community/governance), which includes information
about, and ways to contact, the
[@napari/steering-council](https://github.com/orgs/napari/teams/steering-council)
and [@napari/core-devs](https://github.com/orgs/napari/teams/core-devs).

## Citing napari

If you find `napari` useful please cite this repository using its DOI as
follows:

> napari contributors (2019). napari: a multi-dimensional image viewer for
> python. [doi:10.5281/zenodo.3555620](https://zenodo.org/record/3555620)

Note this DOI will resolve to all versions of napari. To cite a specific version
please find the DOI of that version on our [zenodo
page](https://zenodo.org/record/3555620). The DOI of the latest version is in
the badge at the top of this page.

## Help

We're a community partner on the [image.sc
forum](https://forum.image.sc/tag/napari) and all help and support requests
should be posted on the forum with the tag `napari`. We look forward to
interacting with you there.

Bug reports should be made on our [github
issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new?template=bug_report.md)
using the bug report template. If you think something isn't working, don't
hesitate to reach out - it is probably us and not you!

Commit message:

fix index conda env and use python_version

docs/index.md, after:

---
theme:
  metaDescription: napari is a fast, interactive, multi-dimensional image viewer for Python. It's designed for browsing, annotating, and analyzing large multi-dimensional images. It's built on top of Qt (for the GUI), vispy (for performant GPU-based rendering), and the scientific Python stack (numpy, scipy).
  quickLinks:
    - title: Community
      content: Meet the team, our mission, and our values
      url: /community/index.html

    - title: Tutorials
      content: Step by step guides for common napari workflows
      url: /tutorials/index.html

    - title: Plugins
      content: Learn how to create a plugin that works with the napari ecosystem
      url: /plugins/index.html

    - title: Release notes
      content: See what’s been updated in the latest releases
      url: /release/index.html

    - title: API reference
      content: Information on specific functions, classes, and methods
      url: /api/index.html

    - title: Roadmaps
      content: Find out what we plan to build next and into the near future
      url: /roadmaps/index.html

    - title: Developer guides
      content: Explanations about how napari works behind the screen
      url: /guides/index.html

    - title: Developer resources
      content: All you need to know to contribute to the napari codebase
      url: /developers/index.html

    - title: Source code
      content: Jump out to GitHub to take a look at the code that runs napari
      url: https://github.com/napari/napari

    - title: napari hub
      content: Discover, install, and share napari plugins
      url: https://www.napari-hub.org
---

# napari

## Multi-dimensional image viewer for python

[![image.sc forum](https://img.shields.io/badge/dynamic/json.svg?label=forum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fforum.image.sc%2Ftags%2Fnapari.json&query=%24.topic_list.tags.0.topic_count&colorB=brightgreen&suffix=%20topics&logo=data:image/png;base64,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)](https://forum.image.sc/tag/napari)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/napari.svg)](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/napari/napari/main/LICENSE)
[![Build Status](https://api.cirrus-ci.com/github/Napari/napari.svg)](https://cirrus-ci.com/napari/napari)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/napari/napari/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/napari/napari)
[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/napari.svg)](https://python.org)
[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/napari.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/napari)
[![PyPI - Downloads](https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/napari.svg)](https://pypistats.org/packages/napari)
[![Development Status](https://img.shields.io/pypi/status/napari.svg)](https://github.com/napari/napari)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/144513571.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/144513571)

---

**napari** is a fast, interactive, multi-dimensional image viewer for Python.
It's designed for browsing, annotating, and analyzing large multi-dimensional
images. It's built on top of `Qt` (for the GUI), `vispy` (for performant
GPU-based rendering), and the scientific Python stack (`numpy`, `scipy`). It
includes critical viewer features out-of-the-box, such as support for large
multi-dimensional data, and layering and annotation. By integrating closely with
the Python ecosystem, **napari** can be easily coupled to leading machine
learning and image analysis tools (e.g. `scikit-image`, `scikit-learn`,
`TensorFlow`, `PyTorch`), enabling more user-friendly automated analysis.

![image](./images/multichannel_cells.png)

We're developing **napari** in the open! But the project is in an **alpha**
stage, and there will still likely be **breaking changes** with each release.
You can follow progress
[on our GitHub repository](https://github.com/napari/napari), test out new
versions as we release them, and contribute ideas and code.

## Installation

### Which distribution to install

If you want to contribute back to the napari codebase, you should install from
source code: see the [from source](from-source) section.

If you only wish to use napari as GUI app (and not from python code), the
[bundled app](./tutorials/fundamentals/installation.md#install-as-a-bundled-app)
is the easiest way to install, it does not require having python pre-installed.

If you are using napari from Python to programmatically interact with the app,
you can install via pip, conda-forge, or from source.

### From pip, with "batteries included"

napari can be installed on most macOS, Linux, and Windows systems with Python
{{ python_version_range }} using pip:

```sh
pip install "napari[all]"
```

_(See `Specifying a GUI Backend` below for an explanation of the `[all]` notation.)_

````{important}
While not strictly required, it is *highly* recommended to install
napari into a clean virtual environment using an environment manager like
[conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) or
[venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html). 
This should be set up before you install napari. For example, setting with
up a Python {{ python_version }} environment with `conda`:

{{ conda_env_python_version }}
````

### From conda

```sh
conda install -c conda-forge napari
```

(from-source)=
### Current development branch from github

To install the current `main` branch on github (which will usually be ahead
of the latest release on pypi)

```sh
pip install "git+https://github.com/napari/napari.git#egg=napari[all]"
```

For more information or troubleshooting see our [installation
tutorial](./tutorials/fundamentals/installation)

````{admonition} Specifying a GUI Backend
:class: tip

napari needs a library called [Qt](https://www.qt.io/) to run its user interface
(UI). In Python, there are two alternative libraries to run this, called
[PyQt5](https://www.riverbankcomputing.com/software/pyqt/download5) and
[PySide2](https://doc.qt.io/qtforpython/). By default, we don't choose for you,
and simply running `pip install napari` will not install either. You *might*
already have one of them installed in your environment, thanks to other
scientific packages such as Spyder or matplotlib. If neither is available,
running napari will result in an error message asking you to install one of
them.

Running `pip install "napari[all]"` will install the default framework – currently
PyQt5, but this could change in the future.

To install napari with a specific framework, you can use:

```sh
pip install "napari[pyqt5]"    # for PyQt5

# OR
pip install "napari[pyside2]"  # for PySide2
```
````

## Getting started

 If you are new to napari, check out our
 [getting started guide](tutorials/fundamentals/getting_started.md).

### Example

(The example below requires the `scikit-image` package to run. We just use data
samples from this package for demonstration purposes. If you change the example
to use your own dataset, you may not need to install this package.)

From inside an IPython shell or jupyter notebook you can open up an interactive
viewer by calling:

```python
from skimage import data
import napari

viewer = napari.view_image(data.astronaut(), rgb=True)
```

![image](./images/screenshot-add-image.png)

To do the same thing inside a script call (note the call to {func}`napari.run` at
the end)

```python
from skimage import data
import napari

viewer = napari.view_image(data.astronaut(), rgb=True)
napari.run()  # start the event loop and show viewer
```

## Features

Check out the scripts in our
[`examples` folder](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/examples)
to see some of the functionality we're developing!

**napari** supports six main different layer types, `Image`, `Labels`, `Points`,
`Vectors`, `Shapes`, and `Surface`, each corresponding to a different data type,
visualization, and interactivity. You can add multiple layers of different types
into the viewer and then start working with them, adjusting their properties.

All our layer types support n-dimensional data and the viewer provides the
ability to quickly browse and visualize either 2D or 3D slices of the data.

**napari** also supports bidirectional communication between the viewer and the
Python kernel, which is especially useful when launching from jupyter notebooks
or when using our built-in console. Using the console allows you to
interactively load and save data from the viewer and control all the features of
the viewer programmatically.

You can extend **napari** using custom shortcuts, key bindings, and mouse
functions.

## Tutorials

For more details on how to use `napari` checkout our [tutorials](./tutorials/index).
These are still a work in progress, but we'll be updating them regularly.

## Mission, values, and roadmap

For more information about our plans for `napari` you can read our [mission and
values statement](./community/mission_and_values.md), which includes more
details on our vision for supporting a plugin ecosystem around napari.

## Contributing

Contributions are encouraged! Please read our [contributing
guide](./developers/contributing.md) to get started. Given that we're in an
early stage, you may want to reach out on our [Github
Issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues) before jumping in.

## Code of conduct

`napari` has a [Code of Conduct](./community/code_of_conduct) that should be
honored by everyone who participates in the `napari` community.

## Governance

You can learn more about how the `napari` project is organized and managed from
our [governance model](./community/governance), which includes information
about, and ways to contact, the
[@napari/steering-council](https://github.com/orgs/napari/teams/steering-council)
and [@napari/core-devs](https://github.com/orgs/napari/teams/core-devs).

## Citing napari

If you find `napari` useful please cite this repository using its DOI as
follows:

> napari contributors (2019). napari: a multi-dimensional image viewer for
> python. [doi:10.5281/zenodo.3555620](https://zenodo.org/record/3555620)

Note this DOI will resolve to all versions of napari. To cite a specific version
please find the DOI of that version on our [zenodo
page](https://zenodo.org/record/3555620). The DOI of the latest version is in
the badge at the top of this page.

## Help

We're a community partner on the [image.sc
forum](https://forum.image.sc/tag/napari) and all help and support requests
should be posted on the forum with the tag `napari`. We look forward to
interacting with you there.

Bug reports should be made on our [github
issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new?template=bug_report.md)
using the bug report template. If you think something isn't working, don't
hesitate to reach out - it is probably us and not you!
