docs/troubleshooting.md, before:

# Troubleshooting

This page collects a few known issues and solutions for common problems that users might encounter when using napari.
If you are facing an error that is not covered by this page, please check existing issues on the
[napari repository](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues). If you can't find what you are looking for, 
please open a new issue.

## Known issues

### Resetting preferences and settings

Changing napari versions—updating or downgrading—within an environment can cause issues with settings.  These issues can
manifest as napari failing to start. 

Likewise, issues with napari on multiple monitors or with window sizes are also due to settings. These issues can
frequently be solved by resetting the settings back to default using the terminal command:

```python
napari --reset
```

### torch + rosetta + napari crashes Python

In some cases, when using napari on Mac M1 using Rosetta you may experience crashing when adding layers or using a script.
If you observe this, you should run napari using the native arm64 Python interpreter (see [napari#7259](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/7259).

### "module napari has no attribute Viewer"

This may happen when doing an editable install on top of a normal one, or when you have a local file called `napari.py`.

To fix this, either rename the file or remove all previous napari versions in your environment before installing the editable version.

### My image renders as all black/all white

This can happen when the contrast limits are not set correctly. You can reset the contrast limits by right-clicking
"contrast limits", then clicking the "Reset" button in the advanced contrast limits widget shown.

See [](contrast-limits) for more information on contrast limits.

### PermissionError when trying to launch napari on Windows

If you have a PermissionError when trying to launch napari on Windows, it could be due to how numba deals with
permissions. Try setting `NUMBA_CACHE_DIR` to an user-accessible location.

See [napari#7288](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/7288).

Commit message:

Add info about adapted plugins to troubleshooting guide (#623)
# References and relevant issues
Closes #619

# Description
 This PR adds two new known issues to the Troubleshooting guide:

- A section advising users to restart napari if they can't see a newly
installed Plugin listed
- A section advising users to turn off the `Use npe2 adaptor` setting if
an installed plugin is missing options. This also links to the adapted
plugin guide

<!-- Final Checklist
- If images included: I have added [alt
text](https://webaim.org/techniques/alttext/)
If workflow, documentation build or deployment change:
- My PR is the minimum possible work for the desired functionality
- I have commented my code, to let others know what it does
-->

Co-authored-by: Draga Doncila <ddon0001@student.monash.edu>

docs/troubleshooting.md, after:

# Troubleshooting

This page collects a few known issues and solutions for common problems that users might encounter when using napari.
If you are facing an error that is not covered by this page, please check existing issues on the
[napari repository](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues). If you can't find what you are looking for, 
please open a new issue.

## Known issues

### Installed plugin doesn't show up in `Plugins` menu

Installed `npe2` plugins (this is most plugins!) are not loaded until you restart `napari`. Try restarting the viewer
and see whether this resolves your issue.

### Plugin options missing

If you've installed a plugin, restarted `napari`, and some of the plugin's options are missing e.g. there is no `Tools`
menu or you're trying to save layers and can't find the plugin in the listed writers, you might have an auto-converted
plugin using the deprecated `npe1` engine.

Try turning off the `Use npe2 adaptor` setting under `Preferences -> Plugins -> Use npe2 adaptor` and restarting napari.
This setting will be removed in version `0.7.0` of napari, so reach out to the plugin developer to update their plugin.

Learn more about this in the [adapted plugin guide](adapted-plugin-guide).

### Resetting preferences and settings

Changing napari versions—updating or downgrading—within an environment can cause issues with settings.  These issues can
manifest as napari failing to start. 

Likewise, issues with napari on multiple monitors or with window sizes are also due to settings. These issues can
frequently be solved by resetting the settings back to default using the terminal command:

```python
napari --reset
```

### torch + rosetta + napari crashes Python

In some cases, when using napari on Mac M1 using Rosetta you may experience crashing when adding layers or using a script.
If you observe this, you should run napari using the native arm64 Python interpreter (see [napari#7259](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/7259).

### "module napari has no attribute Viewer"

This may happen when doing an editable install on top of a normal one, or when you have a local file called `napari.py`.

To fix this, either rename the file or remove all previous napari versions in your environment before installing the editable version.

### My image renders as all black/all white

This can happen when the contrast limits are not set correctly. You can reset the contrast limits by right-clicking
"contrast limits", then clicking the "Reset" button in the advanced contrast limits widget shown.

See [](contrast-limits) for more information on contrast limits.

### PermissionError when trying to launch napari on Windows

If you have a PermissionError when trying to launch napari on Windows, it could be due to how numba deals with
permissions. Try setting `NUMBA_CACHE_DIR` to an user-accessible location.

See [napari#7288](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/7288).
