docs/tutorials/fundamentals/features.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---
(feature-highlights)=
# Feature highlights

This page highlights a few napari features that are useful in many scenarios and might be easily overlooked.
The [command palette](command-palette) is great to avoid clicking around menus to find _that_ specific command.
The [measurement tool](measure-tool) allows for quick distance and area measurements.
For layers with `features`, the [features table widge](features-table-widget) provides a simple graphical interface for editing and interaction with the feature table.

(command-palette)=
## Command Palette

napari has a **command palette** that can be opened with
the keyboard shortcut {kbd}`Command/Ctrl+Shift+P`. As you type
the action's name, the command palette will dynamically suggest matching actions.
You can continue typing to refine suggestions or use the arrow
keys to make a selection. Once you have the action you want highlighted, press
{kbd}`Enter` to run the action. *Added in version 0.6.0.*

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/command-palette.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/command-palette.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/command-palette.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="a screen recording showing the command palette in action to open Cells 3D example and toggle 3D viewer mode"
    >
  </video>

</figure>
```
...

(measure-tool)=
## Measure distances and areas

When using a `Shapes` layer to annotate features of interest, the **Shape Measurement Tool** is used to obtain a live measurement of the available shapes, including perimeter and area. You can also measure distances by tracing a `Line` between two points.

This tool can be enabled by clicking on `Layers->Measure->Toggle shape dimensions measurement (napari builltins)` while a `Shapes` layer is selected. As with all other commands, this can also be enabled using the [command palette](command-palette) by searching for "shape measurement".

![image: Shape measurement tool enabled](../../_static/images/shape-measure.png).

The measurements are displayed on the canvas and updated live, and they are also accessible through the layer's features table via `layer.features['_area']` and `layer.features['_perimeter']`.

(features-table-widget)=
## Features table widget

The **Features Table Widget** can be used to visualize, edit, select, or save the contents of the `features` table of any layer that supports features (e.g., `Points.features`).

![image: Features Table Widget](../../_static/images/features_table_widget.png).

To open it, go to `Layer -> Visualize -> Features Table Widget` or press
{kbd}`Command/Ctrl+Shift+P` to open the [command palette](command-palette) and search for "features".
To see it in action, see the {ref}`sphx_glr_gallery_features_table_widget.py` gallery example.

## Running python scripts with napari

Images and other data files are not the only thing that napari can read! You can also run any python script in napari by [drag'n'dropping](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/examples/drag_and_drop_python_code.py) the script onto the viewer. When a script is opened with napari the first viewer instance created by the script will be replaced with the current existing viewer.

This feature is especially useful for quickly testing or distributing code snippets without needing to leave the viewer or touch the console.

## Startup script

Since napari 0.6.5 it is possible to provide a script that will be run every time napari starts.
This can be done by providing a script path in Settings » Application » Startup script.
This can be useful, for example, for adding a 
[custom colormap](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/examples/dev/settings_startup_script.py)
or loading a specific plugin every time napari starts.

```{note}
This feature is intended only for users. Plugin are not allowed to modify this setting.
```

As with other settings, the value of this field can be overridden by setting the
`NAPARI_APPLICATION_STARTUP_SCRIPT` environment variable to the path of the script to run at startup.
Setting it to an empty string will disable the startup script.

Commit message:

Add some info about running python scripts via cli (#847)
# References and relevant issues
- closes #819

# Description
Add some info about running python scripts via `napari ...`, with
emphasis on remote files.

docs/tutorials/fundamentals/features.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---
(feature-highlights)=
# Feature highlights

This page highlights a few napari features that are useful in many scenarios and might be easily overlooked.
The [command palette](command-palette) is great to avoid clicking around menus to find _that_ specific command.
The [measurement tool](measure-tool) allows for quick distance and area measurements.
For layers with `features`, the [features table widge](features-table-widget) provides a simple graphical interface for editing and interaction with the feature table.

(command-palette)=
## Command Palette

napari has a **command palette** that can be opened with
the keyboard shortcut {kbd}`Command/Ctrl+Shift+P`. As you type
the action's name, the command palette will dynamically suggest matching actions.
You can continue typing to refine suggestions or use the arrow
keys to make a selection. Once you have the action you want highlighted, press
{kbd}`Enter` to run the action. *Added in version 0.6.0.*

```{raw} html
<figure>
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="../../_static/images/command-palette.webm" type="video/webm" />
    <source src="../../_static/images/command-palette.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
    <img src="../../_static/images/command-palette.png"
      title="Your browser does not support the video tag"
      alt="a screen recording showing the command palette in action to open Cells 3D example and toggle 3D viewer mode"
    >
  </video>

</figure>
```
...

(measure-tool)=
## Measure distances and areas

When using a `Shapes` layer to annotate features of interest, the **Shape Measurement Tool** is used to obtain a live measurement of the available shapes, including perimeter and area. You can also measure distances by tracing a `Line` between two points.

This tool can be enabled by clicking on `Layers->Measure->Toggle shape dimensions measurement (napari builltins)` while a `Shapes` layer is selected. As with all other commands, this can also be enabled using the [command palette](command-palette) by searching for "shape measurement".

![image: Shape measurement tool enabled](../../_static/images/shape-measure.png).

The measurements are displayed on the canvas and updated live, and they are also accessible through the layer's features table via `layer.features['_area']` and `layer.features['_perimeter']`.

(features-table-widget)=
## Features table widget

The **Features Table Widget** can be used to visualize, edit, select, or save the contents of the `features` table of any layer that supports features (e.g., `Points.features`).

![image: Features Table Widget](../../_static/images/features_table_widget.png).

To open it, go to `Layer -> Visualize -> Features Table Widget` or press
{kbd}`Command/Ctrl+Shift+P` to open the [command palette](command-palette) and search for "features".
To see it in action, see the {ref}`sphx_glr_gallery_features_table_widget.py` gallery example.

## Running python scripts with napari

Images and other data files are not the only thing that napari can read! You can also run any python script in napari by [drag'n'dropping](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/examples/drag_and_drop_python_code.py) the script onto the viewer, or by passing the script as an argument to napari. When a script is opened with napari, the first viewer instance created by the script will be replaced with the current existing viewer, if any.

It even works with remote files!

```bash
napari https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/examples/add_3D_image.py
```

This feature is especially useful for quickly testing or distributing code snippets without needing to leave the viewer or touch the console.

## Startup script

Since napari 0.6.5 it is possible to provide a script that will be run every time napari starts.
This can be done by providing a script path in Settings » Application » Startup script.
This can be useful, for example, for adding a 
[custom colormap](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/main/examples/dev/settings_startup_script.py)
or loading a specific plugin every time napari starts.

```{note}
This feature is intended only for users. Plugin are not allowed to modify this setting.
```

As with other settings, the value of this field can be overridden by setting the
`NAPARI_APPLICATION_STARTUP_SCRIPT` environment variable to the path of the script to run at startup.
Setting it to an empty string will disable the startup script.
