docs/tutorials/fundamentals/quick_start.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---
(napari-quick-start)=
# napari quick start

+++

## About napari

napari is a fast, interactive, multi-dimensional image viewer, with [a vibrant plugin ecosystem](https://www.napari-hub.org/) that expands its capability to tackle various domain-specific visualization and analysis needs. It is built on Qt (for the GUI), [vispy](https://vispy.org/) (for performant GPU-based rendering), and the scientific Python stack (numpy, scipy, and scikit-image). 

napari is an open source project on [GitHub](https://github.com/napari/napari) to facilitate transparency, reuse, and extensibility. 

At its core, it provides critical viewer features out-of-the-box, such as support for [large multi-dimensional data](../processing/dask); [“layers”](..//start_index) to simultaneously visualize images, models, and analysis results; and easy manual, interactive annotation in 3D.

This tutorial uses napari 0.4.14. <br>

+++

## What's covered here

This tutorial is for napari first-timers to give them a quick glance of what napari does, and give it a try right away. We will cover:

- Installation 
- Open napari
- Open an image
- Image display adjustment
- Manually label the cell
- Get the cell area measurement
- Next steps

Along the way, you will see how to access napari functions from [Python code](../../api/index) and from GUI - though for different purposes, one method might be easier than another. This quick start guide will not cover ALL possible methods but only some ways to perform basic tasks. For the more complete guide, please visit [our usage guide](../../usage.md).

You will also see some examples of plugins. The core napari viewer focuses on domain-agnostic functions such as layer controls. Analyses and domain specific functions, such as reading a special file format and image segmentation, live in the realm of [plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/).

+++

### Installation

- Download the bundled app for simple installation:

    [Linux installation](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases/download/v0.4.16/napari-0.4.16rc7-Linux-x86_64.zip)<br>
    [macOS installation](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases/download/v0.4.16/napari-0.4.16rc7-macOS-x86_64.zip)<br>
    [Windows installation](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases/download/v0.4.16/napari-0.4.16rc7-Windows-x86_64.zip)<br>

    *Note: for the latest release, please visit [here](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases) and look for Assets.*

- For those familiar with Python:

    napari can be installed on most macOS, Linux, and Windows systems with Python 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9 using pip.

    First, create a clean virtual environment:
```python
conda create -y -n napari-env -c conda-forge python=3.9
conda activate napari-env
```
    Once in napari-env,

```python
pip install 'napari[all]'
```


If you run into any issues, please visit the more detailed [installation guide](./installation), or [report an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new/choose)!

+++

### Open napari

napari can be opened in one of [multiple ways](./getting_started), depending on how it's used in your image analysis workflow.

Here we will be mainly focused on the GUI application.

- From command line: 

    Once installed, simply run
```python
napari
```

- If you installed the bundled app:

    Click on the app icon to open it.<br>
    *Note: for mac users, it may require [security setting changes](https://napari.org/tutorials/fundamentals/installation.html).*

+++

### Open an image

napari natively supports tiff and many other formats supported by [skimage.io.imread](https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.io.html) as input image file format.<br>
Try with your own images or download [this ome tiff file](https://downloads.openmicroscopy.org/images/OME-TIFF/2016-06/MitoCheck/00001_01.ome.tiff).

Additional input file formats may be supported [by plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/). 
Try [napari-aicsimageio](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-aicsimageio) if you have czi, lif, or nd2 files.

Once you have the proper plugin installed, use File > Open Files(s)
and select the image file, or simply drag and drop the image into napari. 

For demo purpose, we will use a sample image that comes with napari.

(1) Open napari IPython console

![IPython console](../../images/IPython.png)

(2) Type

```python
from skimage import data
viewer.add_image(data.cell(), name='cell')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [remove-input]

import napari
from napari.utils import nbscreenshot

viewer = napari.Viewer()

from skimage import data
viewer.add_image(data.cell(), name='cell')
nbscreenshot(viewer, alt_text="image of a single cell opened in napari viewer")
```

### Image display adjustment

The layer controls panel at the upper left of the viewer allows you to adjust contrast, colormap, and other layer properties. These settings affect the visualization, but do not affect the underlying data.

To change the image display through the [API](../../api/index), in IPython console, type

```python
viewer.layers['cell'].colormap = "yellow"
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [remove-input]

viewer.layers['cell'].colormap = "yellow"
nbscreenshot(viewer, alt_text="image of singular cell with yellow tint")
```

### Manually label the cell

To measure the area of the cell, we can use a labels layer and manually "paint" the cell.
The labels layer allows you to record the segmentation result by assigning background = 0, and assigning each object with an integer.

1. Add a new labels layer 
1. Click on "paint"
1. Circle the cell
1. Use "fill" bucket to fill it.

![manual_label](../../images/manual_label.webm)

Several plugins can perform automatic segmentation that takes image layers as input and generates labels layers as output.

Try [cellpose-napari](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/cellpose-napari) if you have cell images.

+++

### Get the cell area measurement

To analyze labels our layer, we can use [scikit-image](https://scikit-image.org/), a popular Python library that comes with your napari installation. [skimage.measure.regionprops](https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.measure.html#skimage.measure.regionprops) provides a good set of features that can be extracted from labels, including area measurement.

In IPython console, type

```python
from skimage.measure import regionprops
props = regionprops(viewer.layers['Labels'].data)
print("the cell area is: ", props[0].area)
```

Alternatively, try [this plugin](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-skimage-regionprops) to have the result in a table form.

**Note:** the area reported by `regionprops` is the number of pixels. Check pixel size and convert the reported number to physical units.

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [remove-cell]

viewer.close_all()
```

### Next steps
- napari provides the flexibility to handle multi-dimensional data. Try opening 3D or higher dimensional images, and switch to 3D view.

![ndisplay](../../images/ndisplay.png)

- Test some [examples](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/examples) to see how to add different layer types and add your own widgets to napari. 

- Explore other [plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/). A few fun ones: [napari-clusters-plotter](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-clusters-plotter), [napari-pyclesperanto-assistant](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-pyclesperanto-assistant), [napari-animation](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-animation).

- If you don't see the functions you need in existing plugins, try to make your own widget with [magicgui](https://napari.org/magicgui/).

- If you've developed some functionality that you think would benefit the community as a whole, consider publishing it as a [plugin](../../plugins/index)!

- Help the napari project by [filing issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues) for bugs you encounter or features that you'd like to see! Or even better, come [join the community meetings](../../community/meeting_schedule) and get to know the team.

Commit message:

Feature: implement python version substitution in conf.py (#84)
* implement python version subs per @Czaki

* tweak index.md wording re: conda env

* Add substitution for python version range

* Use substitutions on quick_start docs

* Fix quick_start installation indentation

* fix index conda env and use python_version

* use python_version_range in Prerequisites

* add python_minimum_version subs

* subs napari version in quick_start bundle links

* fix link substitutions

* Fix missed [

* Add a sustituted link to  stable release page

* rename conda substitution to conda_create_env

docs/tutorials/fundamentals/quick_start.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---
(napari-quick-start)=
# napari quick start

+++

## About napari

napari is a fast, interactive, multi-dimensional image viewer, with [a vibrant plugin ecosystem](https://www.napari-hub.org/) that expands its capability to tackle various domain-specific visualization and analysis needs. It is built on Qt (for the GUI), [vispy](https://vispy.org/) (for performant GPU-based rendering), and the scientific Python stack (numpy, scipy, and scikit-image). 

napari is an open source project on [GitHub](https://github.com/napari/napari) to facilitate transparency, reuse, and extensibility. 

At its core, it provides critical viewer features out-of-the-box, such as support for [large multi-dimensional data](../processing/dask); [“layers”](..//start_index) to simultaneously visualize images, models, and analysis results; and easy manual, interactive annotation in 3D.

This tutorial uses napari 0.4.14. <br>

+++

## What's covered here

This tutorial is for napari first-timers to give them a quick glance of what napari does, and give it a try right away. We will cover:

- Installation 
- Open napari
- Open an image
- Image display adjustment
- Manually label the cell
- Get the cell area measurement
- Next steps

Along the way, you will see how to access napari functions from [Python code](../../api/index) and from GUI - though for different purposes, one method might be easier than another. This quick start guide will not cover ALL possible methods but only some ways to perform basic tasks. For the more complete guide, please visit [our usage guide](../../usage.md).

You will also see some examples of plugins. The core napari viewer focuses on domain-agnostic functions such as layer controls. Analyses and domain specific functions, such as reading a special file format and image segmentation, live in the realm of [plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/).

+++

### Installation

- Download the napari {{ napari_version }} bundled app for simple installation:
    
    {{ '[Linux installation](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases/download/vNAPARI_VER/napari-NAPARI_VER-Linux-x86_64.zip)'.replace('NAPARI_VER', napari_version) }}<br>
    {{ '[macOS installation](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases/download/vNAPARI_VER/napari-NAPARI_VER-macOS-x86_64.zip)'.replace('NAPARI_VER', napari_version) }}<br>
    {{ '[Windows installation](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases/download/vNAPARI_VER/napari-NAPARI_VER-Windows-x86_64.zip)'.replace('NAPARI_VER', napari_version) }}<br>

    *Note: for all other releases, please visit [here](https://github.com/napari/napari/releases) and look for Assets.*

- For those familiar with Python:

    napari can be installed on most macOS, Linux, and Windows systems with Python {{ python_version_range }} using pip.

    First, create a clean virtual environment:

    {{ conda_create_env }}

    Once in napari-env,

    ```python
    pip install 'napari[all]'
    ```


If you run into any issues, please visit the more detailed [installation guide](./installation), or [report an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new/choose)!

+++

### Open napari

napari can be opened in one of [multiple ways](./getting_started), depending on how it's used in your image analysis workflow.

Here we will be mainly focused on the GUI application.

- From command line: 

    Once installed, simply run
```python
napari
```

- If you installed the bundled app:

    Click on the app icon to open it.<br>
    *Note: for mac users, it may require [security setting changes](https://napari.org/tutorials/fundamentals/installation.html).*

+++

### Open an image

napari natively supports tiff and many other formats supported by [skimage.io.imread](https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.io.html) as input image file format.<br>
Try with your own images or download [this ome tiff file](https://downloads.openmicroscopy.org/images/OME-TIFF/2016-06/MitoCheck/00001_01.ome.tiff).

Additional input file formats may be supported [by plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/). 
Try [napari-aicsimageio](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-aicsimageio) if you have czi, lif, or nd2 files.

Once you have the proper plugin installed, use File > Open Files(s)
and select the image file, or simply drag and drop the image into napari. 

For demo purpose, we will use a sample image that comes with napari.

(1) Open napari IPython console

![IPython console](../../images/IPython.png)

(2) Type

```python
from skimage import data
viewer.add_image(data.cell(), name='cell')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [remove-input]

import napari
from napari.utils import nbscreenshot

viewer = napari.Viewer()

from skimage import data
viewer.add_image(data.cell(), name='cell')
nbscreenshot(viewer, alt_text="image of a single cell opened in napari viewer")
```

### Image display adjustment

The layer controls panel at the upper left of the viewer allows you to adjust contrast, colormap, and other layer properties. These settings affect the visualization, but do not affect the underlying data.

To change the image display through the [API](../../api/index), in IPython console, type

```python
viewer.layers['cell'].colormap = "yellow"
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [remove-input]

viewer.layers['cell'].colormap = "yellow"
nbscreenshot(viewer, alt_text="image of singular cell with yellow tint")
```

### Manually label the cell

To measure the area of the cell, we can use a labels layer and manually "paint" the cell.
The labels layer allows you to record the segmentation result by assigning background = 0, and assigning each object with an integer.

1. Add a new labels layer 
1. Click on "paint"
1. Circle the cell
1. Use "fill" bucket to fill it.

![manual_label](../../images/manual_label.webm)

Several plugins can perform automatic segmentation that takes image layers as input and generates labels layers as output.

Try [cellpose-napari](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/cellpose-napari) if you have cell images.

+++

### Get the cell area measurement

To analyze labels our layer, we can use [scikit-image](https://scikit-image.org/), a popular Python library that comes with your napari installation. [skimage.measure.regionprops](https://scikit-image.org/docs/dev/api/skimage.measure.html#skimage.measure.regionprops) provides a good set of features that can be extracted from labels, including area measurement.

In IPython console, type

```python
from skimage.measure import regionprops
props = regionprops(viewer.layers['Labels'].data)
print("the cell area is: ", props[0].area)
```

Alternatively, try [this plugin](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-skimage-regionprops) to have the result in a table form.

**Note:** the area reported by `regionprops` is the number of pixels. Check pixel size and convert the reported number to physical units.

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [remove-cell]

viewer.close_all()
```

### Next steps
- napari provides the flexibility to handle multi-dimensional data. Try opening 3D or higher dimensional images, and switch to 3D view.

![ndisplay](../../images/ndisplay.png)

- Test some [examples](https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/main/examples) to see how to add different layer types and add your own widgets to napari. 

- Explore other [plugins](https://www.napari-hub.org/). A few fun ones: [napari-clusters-plotter](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-clusters-plotter), [napari-pyclesperanto-assistant](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-pyclesperanto-assistant), [napari-animation](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-animation).

- If you don't see the functions you need in existing plugins, try to make your own widget with [magicgui](https://napari.org/magicgui/).

- If you've developed some functionality that you think would benefit the community as a whole, consider publishing it as a [plugin](../../plugins/index)!

- Help the napari project by [filing issues](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues) for bugs you encounter or features that you'd like to see! Or even better, come [join the community meetings](../../community/meeting_schedule) and get to know the team.
